 “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of
                Rapid Population Growth
May 2018




New York City Department for the Aging   Donna M. Corrado, Ph.D.


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




                                                                                                Commissioner
                                             Introduction
Across much of the world, from East Asia through Europe and the Americas, one overarching 21st
century trend has been the rapid growth in the population of older people. New York City reflects this
global development, with the population of residents aged 60 and over expected to grow from 1.25
million in 2000 to 1.86 million in 2040, a striking 49% increase which has already made that age cohort
the largest of all population segments in the City. (See Appendix for a statistical overview of aging
trends.)

The NYC Department for the Aging (DFTA) oversees a network of more than 400 contracts to provide
services, supports and activities to promote the health and well‐being, and generally to enrich the lives,
of older New Yorkers. With the rapid growth in the older adult population in New York City in mind,
DFTA has crafted “Plan 2025”, which lays out a blueprint for adding new services, and making
enhancements to or transforming existing services, to respond to the needs of the burgeoning
population of older people.

“Plan 2025” is divided into several sections:

        Section I:   “Contextual Information”

        Section II: “Priority Service Areas”

        Section III: “Planned Initiatives”




                                                                                                                     1


                                                        “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                           NYC Department for the Aging




                                    I. Contextual Information
The 1.59 million people 60 and over currently living in New York represent a large city in their own right;
this “city within a city” is characterized by several trends, strengths and challenges. Following is
information useful to understanding current and projected aging trends, which, in turn, influenced the
selection of projects and initiatives included in Section III:

Physical and Mental Health. Though many older New Yorkers flourish into their 80s, 90s and beyond,
others experience growing health issues as they age: 36% of the non‐institutionalized population exhibit
mobility limitations and frailty, and others face health issues such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes,
barriers to sound oral care, visual and/or hearing impairments and other disabilities, cognitive
impairment, mental health issues (most commonly significant depression and anxiety), nutritional
deficits, and a tendency to falls with associated dire consequences. In the absence of adequate
interventions to address these issues, the result can be premature aging and death. Conversely, over the
past decade, there have been major advances in the development of evidence‐based programs and
other medical and social program interventions to alleviate, prevent or delay the onset of these
problems and issues. An impact analysis commissioned by DFTA and undertaken by the Fordham
University School of Social Service (Phase I from 2016; Phase 2 from 2017) tracked older adults enrolled
in various senior center activities and confirmed that the centers’ education and health promotion
sessions and activities have a major and sustained positive impact on the physical and mental health and
well‐being of participants.

Nutrition. Numerous studies and analyses have found that seniors in New York City have significant
levels of hunger and nutritional deficits, due in large part to income issues and certain health issues such
as depression and oral health problems. DFTA is redesigning its home delivered meals program and
reviewing the structure and funding of its senior center nutrition programs to determine ways to
maximize the impact of dollars spent to combat nutritional deficits and hunger.

Income and Employment. A total of 18% of older New Yorkers are below the Federal Poverty Level
(FPL), a rate which is 80% greater than that found for the US older population overall. As a second
measure of economic distress, the Mayor’s Office for Economic Opportunity has found that 32% of older
New Yorkers can be classified as poor or near poor. Lack of income is associated with less access to
health care, especially oral care and mental health interventions, as well as poor nutrition and
inadequate housing. Income deficits are especially prevalent among women (and even more so among
Hispanic women), who often receive less Social Security than men, and who on average live longer than
men, which can pose special problems in maintaining income. A growing percentage of people over age
65 in New York City – currently 17.1% ‐‐ are in the labor force, but for a variety of reasons, including
ageism, finding employment for those who desire or need it can prove to be difficult or impossible.

Housing. As with so many New Yorkers, a large number of older people are severely stretched in terms
of housing costs, especially given that 18% are below the FPL. Additionally, a substantial number of
older adults are in need of supportive services to remain safe and healthy in their homes.


                                                                                                                      2


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




Social Isolation and its Relationship to Caregiving. As people age, they can lose connections to
family and friends through relocations, through the death of spouses and friends, and other factors.
Social isolation has been demonstrated to increase the incidence of various serious‐to‐severe physical
and mental health issues. Lack of transportation options can further aggravate social isolation by
reducing the ability of older people to connect with others. Caregivers are often with loved ones up to
24 hours a day, seven days a week, which can in certain circumstances further isolate them from their
pre‐existing network of family members, friends and other connections to community. A 2017 study
commissioned by DFTA estimated that between 900,000 and 1.3 million New York City residents, many
of whom are over the age of 60, serve as caregivers of older people.

Elder Abuse. In a Cornell University/Lifespan/DFTA survey from 2011, about 9% of New York City
residents over the age of 60 reported having been the victim of elder abuse within the year preceding
the survey, with roughly half of that abuse taking the form of financial scams and fraud. Further, 23 of
24 of these older people had never come to the attention of social services providers.

Cultural Diversity. New York City is enriched through the diversity of its people as defined by race,
ethnicity, immigrant status, language, and other factors. This diversity has made the City uniquely
vibrant, and the older population is no exception. About one‐half of this age cohort is made up of
immigrants, and virtually every major racial and ethnic group is represented among them. Primary
languages spoken in addition to English are Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Russian, and Korean, along
with many others. The Appendix to Plan 2025 provides additional detail. With this cultural diversity
comes exciting challenges in terms of how to reach so many different groups and how to tailor
programming that is sensitive to the cultural and language needs of the people served.

In order to address these and other issues and trends, DFTA funds providers through some 400 direct
service contracts that help meet a variety of needs among older New Yorkers. Examples from FY 2017
include:

        Senior Centers – 166,882 participants over the course of the year, attending 249 senior centers
        and 38 other sites affiliated with those centers, who received nutritious meals and participated
        in activities that promoted social interaction and good health outcomes as well as guidance in
        accessing benefits;

        Naturally Occurring Retirement Communities (NORCs) – 16,737 residents of buildings with
        substantial numbers of older inhabitants received health counseling and assistance as well as
        benefits counseling and other supportive and recreational services and activities;

        Case Management – 33,261 largely homebound clients received assessments to identify issues
        needing to be addressed in order to facilitate living independently at home. Of this total, the
        two largest referrals were to DFTA‐funded home delivered meal programs (26,536 recipients of
        4,487,791 meals); and State and City home care for those not eligible for Medicaid‐funded
        home care (3,087 clients);



                                                                                                                     3


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging



        Caregiver Programs – fielded nearly 10,000 inquiries about caregiver‐related issues, many of
        which resulted in referrals to services such as respite, support groups, and benefits assistance;

        NY Connects ‐ a hotline that handled 16,320 calls from people of all ages needing social service
        and other types of referrals;

        Elder Abuse Programs – where approximately 10,000 victims of physical, emotional, sexual and
        financial abuse received legal and mental health services as well as other supports to deal with
        the damaging ramifications of abuse; and

        Other Programming – including but not limited to senior employment services for those
        wanting or needing to find a job, transportation services, Medicare counseling, and foster
        grandparent programming.

Through this variety of programming, DFTA and its partners were able to assist 231,178 older New York
City residents in FY 2017. The two principal goals of Plan 2025 are to strengthen, expand and enrich
existing aging services programs in New York City; and to create new initiatives and supports that build
on existing programs, especially as the aging population in the City continues to grow and evolve. In
crafting the Plan, DFTA has taken into account several key Priority Service Areas:




                                                                                                                     4


                                                         “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                            NYC Department for the Aging




                                      II. Priority Service Areas

Factors and trends delineated in the prior section have given rise to several Priority Service Areas within
the aging services landscape, which ‐‐ given the growth of the population ‐‐ are likely to become even
more pronounced over time. These areas define the need for services aimed at helping seniors
experience good health and well‐being while remaining as long as possible within their communities;
reaching seniors in great need of services who do not currently avail themselves of them; and
supporting those unable to easily leave their homes:

The Need for Affordable Housing. The current Mayoral administration has made an unprecedented
commitment to the creation and preservation of affordable units for seniors. A total of 30,000 of the
300,000 units to be developed and preserved between 2014 and 2026 are targeted to seniors aged 65
and over. These units will help meet the need for affordable housing in a City expecting major
population growth, where the Mayor’s Office for Economic Opportunity has calculated that 32% of
residents comprising the senior cohort are poor or near‐poor.

DFTA plans to collaborate with the NYC Department of Housing Preservation and Development to
provide supportive services for those in need of them who reside in some of the 30,000 units subject to
the affordable housing plan, as well as residents living in other rental housing, in order to promote the
stability of housing arrangements for older residents needing supports of one kind or another.

In addition, some older people are in need of affordable assisted living options in order to avoid
institutional placement, and DFTA will join efforts with City agencies, including HPD, to explore
possibilities for including affordable assisted living in the portfolio of City financed housing efforts for
older New Yorkers.

In November 2017, the HPD and DFTA Commissioners agreed to have key staff meet regularly to explore
the ideas above as well as other possible initiatives that would expand affordable housing availability.

One key initiative was announced in the Administration’s January 2018 budget plan, namely, a five‐year
expansion of the Home Sharing program, which currently matches 72 people annually with owners and
renters having space in their homes and apartments.

Mental Health. The level of moderate to severe depression among older people served by DFTA ranges
from 7% in senior centers to about 30% among the population suffering from elder abuse. DFTA has
been fortunate to receive substantial funds from ThriveNYC to combat depression and other mental
health issues through a clinical mental health program lodged in a number of senior centers and through
a friendly visiting program for homebound seniors, many of whom are socially isolated. The next section
of Plan 2025 references additional program development ideas that DFTA is exploring in the realm of
mental health services.



                                                                                                                       5


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




Reaching the Isolated. Social isolation leads to declines in physical, mental and cognitive health. As
people age, they can lose their network of spouses, families and friends. DFTA will work with ThriveNYC
staff to develop initiatives to combat social isolation in order to reach those currently cut off from
services they desperately need. One means to accomplish this is through tapping into innovative
technology currently under development to support the senior market.

DFTA currently receives ThriveNYC funds to provide friendly visiting volunteers to reduce isolation
among largely homebound clients in DFTA’s case management program. Another effort to combat
social isolation and associated mental health issues under exploration by DFTA is the use of technologies
such as behavioral telehealth, whereby homebound and isolated seniors can be connected from home
with mental health services and various activities.

Employing Technology to Strengthen the Reach and Quality of Aging Services. Recent
technological advances hold great promise for extending the reach and quality of services available to
seniors. As mentioned above, behavioral telehealth technology allows providers to circumvent
geographical limitations by “virtually” visiting homes in order to provide interactive mental health
sessions for those who cannot easily get to a clinic. Apps to summon point‐to‐point transportation for
everything from medical appointments to just getting out of the house to visit with a friend show great
potential for lowering transportation costs and for providing more travel options compared with other
transportation modes. A priority area of this Plan is to work with the NYC Department of
Transportation, MTA Access‐A‐Ride, the Taxi and Limousine Commission, and others to inventory
current technologies that could be brought to bear to expand the reach, quality and cost‐effectiveness
of a wide range of services critical to the health and well‐being of older New Yorkers, as well as to make
technology more accessible to older adults.

DFTA and the Mayor’s Office for People with Disabilities have received a Federal Transportation
Administration grant to test the usefulness of point‐to‐point car services to increase access for people of
all ages who have disabilities that limit their ability to use Access‐A‐Ride. These individuals could more
readily get to medical appointments, lunch with friends, shopping, etc., by being able to summon car
services to pick them up and take them home on a 24/7 basis. This demonstration grant will begin in CY
2019, and results will inform efforts to create a more effective transportation network for older people
and others with disabilities.

Improving Nutrition/Reducing Hunger. DFTA’s home delivered meals (HDM) program provides
18,000 meals each weekday to the hungry and homebound, and its public/private partnership with
Citymeals on Wheels supports weekend, holiday and emergency meals for these recipients. Through
redesigning its current program, DFTA can stretch dollars available for home delivered meals while
providing more nutrition with greater choice and better meal quality to more people: meal quality is
tied to meal consumption.

Achieving efficiencies while improving quality is vitally needed given growing demand as the population
increases and as large numbers of older people face severe income limitations. Low income is of course
highly correlated with lack of nutrition: the NY Coalition Against Hunger estimated in 2014 that 11% of

                                                                                                                     6


                                                      “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                         NYC Department for the Aging



the City’s seniors are food insecure. DFTA engaged a consultant to help shape thinking concerning the
limitations and potential of the current HDM program, and that consultant will soon begin a second
phase of work on an HDM redesign implementation plan.

The consultant will also analyze ways to achieve efficiencies in senior centers’ procurement, preparation
and delivery of high‐quality meals. This will include an analysis of whether funds will be needed beyond
those gained through efficiencies in order to ensure the provision of appealing and nutritious meals
throughout the senior center network.

Promoting the Health of Senior Center Attendees. A major goal of the senior center investment is
to achieve maximum benefits from dollars invested in health and wellness programming, from
education and nutrition classes to exercise sessions and mental health interventions. DFTA will be
developing straightforward metrics to measure success.

Supporting Caregivers. Approximately one million New Yorkers serve as caregivers of older people
and people with dementia in New York City. DFTA and City agency and provider partners recently
completed a survey of caregivers to hear firsthand about their lives and how government and non‐
profits can build on the services already offered to support them in their highly demanding and stressful
work. The Administration is doubling DFTA’s caregiver program budget to $8 million beginning in FY
2018 in order increase services to caregivers, in part based on recommendations developed by a
consortium of agencies in response to the survey findings.




                                                                                                                    7


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




                III. Summary of Planned Initiatives and Projects

Plan 2025 is a living document that will evolve based on continuing input from within DFTA and among
aging services stakeholders. The Plan includes programs and initiatives where work is in an active
developmental stage. It also includes items where work has not proceeded beyond preliminary
discussion, and in these instances, Plan 2025 should be considered more of a blueprint than a full‐
fledged plan.

The projects/initiatives are grouped within three frames; many of the projects could be seen to fall
within more than one, and DFTA has placed each within its most relevant frame:




                              Frame 1: Food, Shelter, Security

      Includes projects and initiatives that:
         improve food quality and choice while providing better nutrition; and
         help people avoid eviction through income supports and legal assistance; receive
           services in Naturally Occurring Retirement Communities; receive supportive services
           in a home setting; and remain safer in their communities and homes.




Home Delivered Meals Redesign. Each weekday, DFTA‐funded providers deliver some 18,000
lunches to largely lower income older New Yorkers; Citymeals on Wheels arranges for delivery on
weekends and holidays. DFTA is engaging PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) to conduct Phase II of a
redesign effort, which will be centered on how to achieve efficiencies in delivery costs and better prices
for better food in order to reinvest those savings in higher quality meals with greater choice of cuisines
reflecting the diversity of the City. PwC will complete its work later in CY 2018, and results will help
shape a concept paper for stakeholder input, followed by a solicitation, with new contracts commencing
on July 1, 2020.

Housing. The Mayor’s 2014‐2026 housing plan – through its inclusion of 30,000 newly created or
preserved units targeted to seniors – represents a major resource for older New Yorkers. Beyond this
plan, DFTA intends to reach out to several City agencies for possible collaborations:

            1. Department of Finance, to discuss ways to further increase enrollment in SCRIE and
               SCHE;



                                                                                                                     8


                                                      “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                         NYC Department for the Aging



            2. Department of Housing Preservation and Development, concerning possible joint efforts
               to provide supportive services in targeted units, including through the Senior Affordable
               Rental Apartments program; and
            3. Human Resources Administration, around possible collaborations for people receiving
               help through recently passed right‐to‐counsel legislation for all indigent tenants, in
               order to address stresses and pressures older people may be facing that have
               contributed to and/or stemmed from their precarious housing situations. A second
               possible area of collaboration is efforts in support of homeless older New Yorkers.

The Administration included funds beginning in FY 2019 to expand the Home Share program, whereby
people in need of housing are matched with homeowners and holders of leases with space for an
additional person; the person to be placed and/or the homeowner/lease holder must be 55 or over.
The program represents an affordable housing option that the City is able to offer at low administrative
cost. Details of the program for FY 2019 and beyond are currently being finalized.

Finally, DFTA would like to explore the expansion of its home repair program, which has proven
beneficial through providing simple repairs in homes.

Naturally Occurring Retirement Communities (NORCs). DFTA funds community‐based
organizations to provide social and health services to residents of NORCs, which are privately and
publicly owned buildings and developments where large numbers of people are aged 60 and over. The
Department would like to revisit the NORC model to increase its responsiveness, within specified
parameters, to needs voiced by residents as well as the involved community‐based organizations. DFTA
staff will meet with the Commissioner for guidance that will be applied to the development of a concept
paper, followed by release of an RFP.

The Division of Planning & Technology (P&T) Quality Assurance/Continuous Quality Improvement
(QA/CQI) team will work with DFTA program colleagues and NORC programs to determine what works
well in the current Health Indicators program and what could be improved. This program aims to collect
baseline information on the NORC population by community, which can then be applied to measuring
changes over time, including those that may occur through health care interventions. The team will
pinpoint ways to streamline the existing program so that it can achieve greater utility as a longitudinal
method to measure changes in health care status. DFTA will analyze DOHMH population health status
data to inform this effort. Over time, DFTA will also consider expansion of the Health Indicators
program to senior centers.

Transportation. In 2019, DFTA will commence a demonstration using a Section 5310 grant from the
Federal Transportation Administration, and overseen by the NYC Department of Transportation (DOT),
to test whether point‐to‐point transportation using an app or calling a dispatcher can free adults with
mobility and other issues to get around the City for everything from medical appointments to
connecting with friends. DFTA will be reaching out to the Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC) about
progress with similar demonstrations using technology undertaken by TLC and MTA Access‐A‐Ride. This
information will help guide DFTA in developing a detailed plan for expanding transportation options.


                                                                                                                    9


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




                               Frame 2: Health and Well‐Being
      Includes programs and initiatives that:
          offer settings where older people, including immigrants and people representing the
            vast array of linguistic, cultural, racial, ethnic and national groups comprising the City,
            can gather to enjoy meals together, socialize with one another, and participate in
            health and wellness programming;
          make staff available to guide people in need of physical and mental health resources;
          provide support and respite to clients to help them counter the stresses and
            challenges of caregiving;
          promote connections with the health care system to the benefit of older people and
            the aging services providers who support them; and
          connect clients with services to plan for the end of life and to promote quality‐of‐life
             when facing serious health challenges, and later on, in preparing for the end.




Caregiver Program Expansion: With an infusion of $4 million in funds on top of the $4 million
available from the Older Americans Act, the Administration has doubled resources available for
caregivers. In addition, in line with City Council legislation passed in CY 2016, DFTA engaged a
consultant and worked with other City agencies as well as entities such as AARP on a survey of caregiver
needs. Based on results and the additional funds, DFTA is expanding respite hours. The Department will
track hours to determine the extent to which the expanded funds help caregivers deal with the
sometimes exhausting stresses of caregiving by making individual, group and overnight respite available
to them.

Results from the caregiver survey will also inform a concept paper and solicitation that will be released
for new contracts commencing on July 1, 2019.

Transforming the Senior Center Network: The Administration has made available $10 million
annually beginning in FY 2018, expanding to $20 million by FY 2021, for strengthened senior center
programming and to retain existing and attract new talented staff. DFTA worked with OMB to create a
model to distribute the funds with the aim of creating greater equity and fairness across the senior
center system in terms of levels of support for senior centers. DFTA expects that this substantial
increase in baseline support for centers will significantly build upon the strong health, wellness and
other outcomes noted in a CY 2017 impact analysis commissioned by DFTA and conducted by the
Fordham University School of Social Service. The Department will track outcomes beginning in FY 2019.



                                                                                                                    10


                                                      “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                         NYC Department for the Aging



DFTA will work with OMB to apply results from PwC’s Phase II food sourcing, preparation and delivery
analysis to the senior center network in order to assess the adequacy of food funding within the senior
center network, how to achieve efficiencies that can be reinvested in quality meal programming with
choice for seniors from diverse backgrounds, and whether additional funds beyond those already
budgeted for food staff and food purchasing are needed even after savings from efficiencies are
achieved.

Case Management. DFTA funds staff associated with 21 case management contracts to provide
services to 33,000 older people annually who are largely homebound. Case management professionals
work hand‐in‐hand with the clients to assess needs and to develop care plans to meet those needs. This
involves a range of referrals and supports vital to the health, well‐being and independence of the older
people. Two of the most widely used services are home delivered meals (27,000 clients served in FY
2017) and non‐Medicaid funded home care (3,300 clients). DFTA program staff along with P&T research
staff will explore ways to further enrich programming in several areas: oral care, mental health, vision,
hearing and falls prevention, as well as the connection of clients to primary care physicians to promote
better physical health, especially as related to cardiovascular conditions and diabetes. DFTA caregiver
program leaders will join this effort to determine how to build synergies between the case management
and caregiver programs.

The QA/CQI team will work with program staff to assess the results of the small Home Meds pilot as well
as ways to accelerate the process of bringing the program to scale if funds can be obtained.

Mental Health Services. DFTA has been awarded funds through ThriveNYC for two projects:
placement of mental health clinicians in senior centers (DFTA Geriatric Mental Health program), and
friendly visiting to combat social isolation, which has a major negative impact on physical and mental
health status. DFTA recently submitted several proposed items to ThriveNYC staff for possible
additional funding. The three highest priorities are:

            1. Behavioral telehealth efforts;
            2. Expand the Geriatric Mental Health program to additional senior centers; and
            3. Establish a working group of researchers and practitioners, including HRA Adult
               Protective Services, to discuss possible interventions to address hoarding that can lead
               to changed behaviors within shorter timeframes than found in many current programs
               and that are scalable in terms of reaching more people than some existing programs;
               fund shorter‐term interventions that can help hoarders change behaviors that place
               them and neighbors at risk.

Social Isolation. Many caregivers become socially isolated due to the in‐home demands of their
caregiving, and of course, social isolation includes many others that DFTA does not currently reach
through its various programs. DFTA is joining the ThriveNYC sub‐committee on social isolation and will
use that forum as a means to work with many other agencies on this issue, related to caregivers and
other older people, and to arrive at inter‐agency methods to address it. Simultaneously, the Aging in
New York Fund, which is DFTA’s non‐profit arm, has named social isolation as one of the two core issues


                                                                                                                   11


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging



that it will focus on in upcoming months and years, and ANYF and DFTA are working on a plan of action,
to be ready in spring 2018, on how to make further inroads into reaching those who are isolated and to
offer supports to them.

Working with Partners in Aging Services and Other Systems to Promote Health Care Linkages.
In 2017, DFTA created a Management Services Organization (MSO) through its non‐profit arm, the Aging
in New York Fund, to work with ten DFTA‐funded providers on developing linkages with the health care
world. Through these linkages, health care providers and insurers would refer and pay for competitively
priced aging services for their consumers, such as falls prevention programming and home delivered
meals. This would allow aging services providers to expand the quality and quantity of services they can
offer. In CY 2018, DFTA will be marketing the services to providers in the health care world, and
depending on results, may continue to invest in building these linkages through the MSO.

DFTA will also be continuing its small care transitions program with Health + Hospitals (H+H), which is
due to end in March 2020.

With the assignment of DFTA to the portfolio of Deputy Mayor Palacio in spring 2018, DFTA plans later
in the year to discuss with the Deputy Mayor and the heads of DOHMH and H + H their interest in
partnering with upstream providers and advocacy organizations to develop an agenda constituting
common interests among the partners vis‐à‐vis the health care world. One aim would be to reach out to
the State Department of Health with this agenda in hand. The agenda would focus on joint exploration
with State DOH of ways to build more productive linkages between health care and aging services,
among other sectors. These would include the investment of some level of health care resources in
aging services to support an expansion of the cost‐effective array of services and activities that the aging
field provides to older people to help prevent the onset and severity of a host of costly health
conditions.

End‐of‐Life Planning; Palliative Care. In 2019, DFTA plans to explore linkages with palliative care
programs to determine possible collaborations for providing end‐of‐life counseling through DFTA’s
current programs, as well as to reach other seniors to spread the word about the uses and values of
palliative care and of end‐of‐life planning. This will include vehicles such as symposia to be designed and
delivered by the Department’s Learning Center.

Elder Abuse. DFTA collaborated with Cornell University and Lifespan of Greater Rochester to publish
the first city and statewide elder abuse prevalence study in the nation, which found that 9% of New York
City seniors reported having been the victims of elder abuse within the past year. This resulted in a
major expansion of funding for contract providers to combat elder abuse, as well as the expansion,
beginning in 2018, of Multi‐Disciplinary Teams, which bring together a wide range of professionals to
tackle particularly complex cases involving different service systems. With the allocation of increased
resources to combat this form of domestic violence, DFTA research and program staff will collaborate on
an evaluation of its elder abuse initiatives to learn more about the impact of the programs in dealing
with the challenges facing elder abuse victims.



                                                                                                                    12


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




                              Frame 3: Meaning and Purpose
     Includes programs and initiatives that:
         connect older people with enriching cultural pursuits;
         connect older people with technologies that can open new vistas and resources to
           them, as well as promote the use of tools for aging services professionals to increase
           the efficiency and effectiveness of aging services programming; and
         improve the physical environment and otherwise make New York City a more livable
           place for aging.



Cultural Activities. DFTA has worked with the Department of Cultural Affairs to place artists in senior
centers to give participants instruction on the creation of artworks. It proved to be a program that
highly benefited participants, who took great joy in their work, which helped alleviate issues such as
depression and anxiety. Given results from this program, DFTA will reach out to Cultural Affairs in 2018
to discuss other possible ways to link seniors with the arts.


Technology. DFTA plans to tap into the rapidly changing technological landscape to help the
Department achieve its goals on a number of the initiatives described in this document. This will be
done in two ways. First, the Department will review and assess the learning needs of older people in
order to promote the ability of interested older adults to use technology in their everyday lives. Second,
DFTA will work within the technology field to identify products that can support various efforts
undertaken by the Department and its partners. Examples include data sharing in a secure
environment, data management, systems development, and products that can lead to more effective
and efficient program delivery. As it conducts this work, DFTA will determine whether groups such as
Older Adults Technology Services (OATS), as well as City agencies such as DoITT, would like to join in this
effort.

Volunteerism. DFTA’s Volunteer Resource Center (VRC) presents volunteers with a wealth of
opportunities to improve the lives of older people. In CY 2018, VRC staff will work with P&T QA/CQI
staff in order to refocus their operations to ensure that volunteers continue to be placed successfully
and have a positive experience.

Age Friendly New York. DFTA has collaborated with over 20 City agencies and other entities on a 10‐
year Age Friendly initiative, where the agencies have developed a host of projects, from transportation
safety to increasing the availability of street benches, to make the City more livable for older people.



                                                                                                                    13


                                                      “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                         NYC Department for the Aging



The second‐phase Age Friendly plan was released in CY 2017, and DFTA will be working with the other
agencies to monitor implementation of projects developed through the plan.

Building the Workforce; Employment for Older People. With the increasing population of older
people comes the continuously growing need for a skilled and well prepared professional workforce. In
2020, DFTA plans to reach out to the Department of Education, as well as undergraduate and graduate
university programs, to discuss collaborations that could attract students to focus on studies related to
the older population and to take positions in the aging field upon graduation.

DFTA will also reach out to labor experts to discuss ways to increase employment opportunities for older
people; results of discussions will inform efforts to expand upon the successful DFTA‐funded Senior
Employment Services and ReServist programs.

The Department will continue its work with aging services partners and the Administration to ensure
adequate support of not‐for‐profit professionals in order to attract the highest quality human services
personnel to the aging services field and to retain them over time.

In early CY 2018, DFTA will complete an analysis to determine the number of additional staff needed at a
minimum to allow the Department to carry out the initiatives outlined in Plan 2025.

Programs to be Considered Later in Plan 2025. The Plan above does not address several of DFTA’s
directly run programs nor several contracted ones. DFTA is conducting internal reviews of those
programs and may incorporate additional program development efforts into Plan 2025 in an annual
update depending upon the results of the reviews. Similarly, for recently expanded programs, DFTA will
be reviewing progress, and depending on the reviews, additional items may be included in future Plan
updates. Finally, as alluded to earlier in this document, other needs for existing program enhancements
and for new programming will become apparent through ongoing stakeholder input as the aging
services field continues to evolve.


Please see the Appendix, which provides a statistical snapshot of older New Yorkers.




                                                                                                                   14


Appendix

Statistical Snapshot of Older New Yorkers
NYC Department for the Aging
November 2017


By 2040, New York’s 60+ population will significantly increase to a projected 1.86 million, a 48.5%
increase from 2000. This group will comprise 20.6% of the total population, compared with 15.6%
in 2000. Thus, the elderly, who were less than one in every six New Yorkers in 2000, will make up
more than one in every five in 2040.i


Aging Within the Older Population
The City’s total older population, which increased from 1.25 million in 2000 to 1.59 million in
2015, has significantly changed in age composition.


                 Percentage Change of Selected Age Groups, New York City (2000‐2015)ii



         60.0%
                       47.9%
         50.0%

         40.0%
                                      28.4%                            26.7%
         30.0%

         20.0%
                                                        5.2%
         10.0%

          0.0%
                      60‐64          65‐74           75‐84            85+

                                               Age



From 2000 to 2015, the number of residents 60‐64 years and older increased dramatically, by
47.9%. The number of people aged 65‐74, and the eldest group (85 and older) also grew quickly
by 28.4% and 26.7% respectively. Those between ages 75 and 84 slightly increased by 5.2%. By



                                                                                             i


                                                   “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                      NYC Department for the Aging




2040, boomers will be part of the oldest population group, and the growth of this 85+ group will
be 71.7% between 2000 and 2040.iii Disability is prevalent among the oldest cohort, creating a
growing need for long‐term care services.

Increase in Life Expectancy
The latest figures indicate that New York City life expectancy at birth is at an all‐time high of
81.2 years, an increase of 3.6 years from 2000 to 2015iv. However, life expectancy gains are not
shared uniformly across gender or race. Women continue to experience longer life
expectancies at birth compared to men. In 2015, New York City women had a life expectancy of
83.5 years, while men had an average life expectancy of 78.6 yearsv. Additionally, the 2010 U.S.
Census shows the Hispanic population in New York City to have had an average life expectancy
at birth of 81.9 years, the white population of 81.2 years, and the black population of 76.9
years.vi Life expectancy data for Asians were not available in the 2010 US Census.

Increase in the Older Female Population
Not only do women have a greater life expectancy than men, but as of 2015, women continue
to outnumber men by 246,580 within the 60+ age group. The number of women is more than
double that of men among those 85 and older.vii By 2040, the sex ratio (number of males per
100 females) for New Yorkers is projected at 80 for those 55‐64, 75 for those 65‐74, 67 for
those 75‐84, and 52 for those 85 and older.viii Thus, as is the case currently, women 85+ in 2040
will outnumber men their age by nearly 2 to 1, and this greater longevity results in more
women living alone during their later years.

Poverty rates are higher, on average, for women living alone than for those living with a partner
or for men living alone or with another person. To a significant degree, this is due to the fact
that women tend to receive lower Social Security payments because of time spent out of the
paid workforce, as well as the prevalence of lower paying salaries for women than their male
counterparts during their years of employment.

Women 65 and older comprise 67.7% of the frail older population. More than one third of older
women are in the frail status. In contrast, less than one‐fourth of older men are frail. ix Frailty
can lead to functional impairments, which may require long‐term care.

Increase in Diversity
American Community Survey data show that from 2000 to 2015, the non‐Hispanic white older
population decreased, whereas the number of minority members of that group grew rapidly. In
2015, 61.5% of New Yorkers 65 and older were members of minority groups, compared to 43%
in 2000 and 35% in 1990. Between 2000 and 2015, the Black population increased by 44%, the
Hispanic population by 74%, and the Asian population by 137%.x



                                                                                                                 ii


                                                  “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                     NYC Department for the Aging




                 Table A: Minority 65+ Population in New York City, 2000‐2015 xi

         Race/Ethnic Profile                   2000 Census         2015 ACS             % Change
                                                                                       2000‐2015

         White (Non‐Hispanic)                      533,982           483,123                 ‐9.5%

         Black                                     185,088           267,037               44.28%

         Hispanic                                  138,840           240,986               73.57%

         Asian/Pacific Islanders                    59,056           139,717             136.58%

         All Minorities                            382,984          647,740                69.13%



There are also significant linguistic differences: nearly 50% of older New Yorkers speak a
language other than English at home.xii Linguistic and cultural differences coupled with the
challenges of aging and disability can have a significant impact on health outcomes. A review of
health literature found that language barriers have a negative impact on access to and quality
of health care as well as patient satisfaction and, in certain instances, cost.
The development of a language assistance plan that includes interpreter services and bilingual
clinicians is an effective measure for improving care.xiii Executive Order 120 requires the City’s
social service agencies to provide translation and interpretation services in the top six
languages spoken by New Yorkers. Each of these agencies, including DFTA, has developed a
language access implementation plan for at least six languages. New York City’s 24‐hour
information and services number, known as 3‐1‐1, provides services to callers in 175 languages
and dialects.xiv


Income and Poverty
Inadequate income continues to be a critical problem facing the elderly in New York City.
Whereas the United States has experienced a decline in the national poverty rate for older
people, from 12.8% in 1990 to 9.0% in 2015, New York City’s older adults experienced an
increase in poverty from 16.5% to 18.1% for the same time period.xv The 2015 Federal poverty
level was $11,770 for a single person and $15,930 for a couple.xvi

The Social Security Administration reports that the current average Social Security benefit for a
retired worker is $1,368 per month.xvii Social Security represents more than half the income for
senior headed households in New York City in 2015.xviii This average benefit is often inadequate
to cover the high cost of living in New York City.




                                                                                                                iii


                                                  “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                     NYC Department for the Aging




         Table B: Poverty by Race for Older New Yorkers Aged 65 and Above (2015)xix

                                Total Older    Number Below            % Below Poverty
                                 Cohort*         Poverty                 Level (2015)

                    White        469,821           54,655                     11.6%
                     Black       257,989           47,610                     18.5%
                   Hispanic      234,238           68,697                     29.3%
                    Asian        137,465           30,675                     22.3%


Note: Totals do not match Table A as poverty information was not available for all persons.


The percentage of minority elderly living in poverty is significantly higher than for the white
population. Data indicate that a substantial proportion of minority older people live in poverty
– 29% of Hispanics, 22% of Asians, and 19% of blacks. In addition, the number of older women
living below the poverty level (20%) is approximately 4 percentage points higher than that of
their male counterparts (16%).xx

In 2015, the median household income for older New Yorkers was $33,917, lower than the
nation’s median of $40,971.xxi Median income also varies significantly by race. In 2015, the
median income of:
         Hispanic households was $17,500, 63% less than that of the white population, whose
            median household income was $47,500;
         Black households was $32,500 or 32% less than for the white population; and
         Asian households was $27,500, 42% less than in the white population.xxii

With an increasing percentage of New York City’s older adults living in poverty, a targeted
expansion of multiple income supports would help those most in need. These include, but are
not limited to Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Medicaid, the Medicare Savings Program
and other Medicare subsidies for people of lower income, SNAP (“food stamps”), the Home
Energy Assistance Program, affordable housing programs, rent freezes through the Senior
Citizen Rent Increase Exemption program (SCRIE), and property tax increase exemptions
through the Senior Citizen Homeowner’s Exemption program (SCHE).




                                                                                                                iv


                                                       “Plan 2025”: Aging Services in an Era of Rapid Population Growth
                                                                                          NYC Department for the Aging




Endnotes for Appendix
i
   2000 Census; New York City Department of Planning, “New York City Population Projections by
Age/Sex & Borough, 2010-2040”, December, 2013.
ii
    2010 Census and 2015 ACS.
iii
    2000 Census; New York City Department of Planning, “New York City Population Projections by
Age/Sex & Borough, 2010-2040”, December, 2013.
iv
    Bureau of Vital Statistics “Summary of Vital Statistics, 2015”, March 2016, Table M25, p 67. The New
York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH).
v
   Ibid, Table M25, p. 67.
vi
    Ibid. Table M24, p. 66
vii
     2010 Census and 2015 ACS.
viii
     New York City Department of Planning, “New York City Population Projections by Age/Sex &
Borough, 2010-2040”, December, 2013.
ix
    2015 ACS
x
   2000 Census and 2015 ACS.
xi
    Ibid.
xii
     2015 ACS.
xiii
     U.S Department of Health and Human Services. “Health plans take action to improve services for
members with limited English proficiency, “Research Activities, No. 295, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, March 2005.
xiv
     New York City 311 Customer Service Center, Language Access Plan, March 23, 2017. Available at:
http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/doitt/downloads/pdf/311‐Language‐Access‐Plan.pdf
xv
    2015 ACS
xvi
      Poverty Thresholds for 2015 by Size of Family and Number of Related Children Under 18 Years, US
Census Bureau.
xvii
      US Social Security Administration. Monthly Statistical Snapshot, May 2017. Available at:
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/quickfacts/stat_snapshot/
xviii
      Office of the New York City Comptroller Scott M. Stringer, Aging with Dignity: A Blueprint for Serving
NYC’s Growing Senior Population, March 2017. p. 13. Available at: https://comptroller.nyc.gov/wp-
content/uploads/documents/Aging_with_Dignity_A_Blueprint_for_Serving_NYC_Growing_Senior_Popul
ation.pdf
xix
      2015 ACS.
xx
    Ibid.
xxi
      Ibid.
xxii
       Ibid.




                                                                                                                     v

