journal of chromatography a, 1448 (2016) 121–126 contents lists available at sciencedirect journal of chromatography a j o ur na l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/chroma short communication polydopamine meets porous membrane: a versatile platform for facile preparation of membrane adsorbers jinxin fana,b, jianquan luoa,∗, xiangrong chena, yinhua wana,∗ a state key laboratory of biochemical engineering, institute of process engineering, chinese academy of sciences, beijing 100190, pr china b university of chinese academy of sciences, beijing 100049, pr china a r t i c l e i n f o article history: received 1 january 2016 received in revised form 20 april 2016 accepted 21 april 2016 available online 22 april 2016 keywords: membrane adsorber membrane chromatography ion-exchange hydrophobic interaction affinity membrane adsorber a b s t r a c t polydopamine, as an intermediate layer coated on pes membrane, was applied to fabricate various membrane adsorbers. anion-exchange, hydrophobic interaction and affinity membrane adsorbers prepared by this facile method exhibited a high selectivity in fractionation of igg (immunoglobulin)/hsa (human serum albumin) mixture. the anion-exchange membrane adsorber containing polyethylenimine (pei) improved the hsa purity from 17.7% to 96.7%; the hydrophobic interaction membrane adsorber with dodecyl mercaptan (ddm) as ligand obtained an igg purity of 94.6%; histidine attached affinity membrane chromatography achieved nearly a 100% purity of igg. the present work indicated that the polydopamine layer not only activated membrane surface to attach various adsorptive ligands under the mild condition, but also reduced non-specific adsorption. due to the versatile conjunction function, this facile mussel-inspired coating is also promising for the preparation of diverse membrane adsorbers. © 2016 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved. 1. introductionbiopharmaceutical therapeutics such as monoclonal antibod-ies, recombinant proteins, viral vaccines and plasmid dna areplaying an increasingly important role in human life and theirglobal market is growing rapidly. considering more than 60% ofthe production cost is incurred during the recovery and purifi-cation in downstream process [1], the commercial manufacturerequires a cost-effective separation process with high throughputand high resolution [2,3] and optimizing conditions for processdevelopment. membrane-based separations offer a great potentialin processing aqueous solutions because of their high efficiency andlower energy consumption. adsorptive ligands could be attachedto membrane surface to construct various membrane adsorbersfor chromatography [4]. as the transport of solutes to their bind-ing sites in membrane matrix takes place mainly by means ofconvection, membrane chromatography is endowed with a rapidseparation speed [5]. in addition, this disposable chromatographyproduct could eliminate the cost of cleaning-in-place and valida-∗corresponding authors.e-mail addresses: jqluo@ipe.ac.cn, jianquan.luo@gmail.com (j. luo),yhwan@ipe.ac.cn (y. wan).tion steps. therefore, the development of membrane adsorbers forchromatography has attracted significant interest in recent years.membrane adsorbers are normally made by hydrophilicmatrixes with less fouling potential. among them, cellulose iswidely used as base membrane since it contains a large quantityof hydroxyl groups, which could be activated for ligands immobi-lization. however, the mechanical strength of the cellulose basedmembrane is relatively low and even may deteriorate during thesurface modification [6]. meanwhile, polymer membranes withhigh mechanical strength are usually hydrophobic and inert. thus,it is prone to produce membrane fouling and is hard to link lig-ands [7]. previous research revealed that chemical modificationand polymer grafting [3,6,8] are effective surface engineering meth-ods for preparing membrane adsorbers. however, these approachesare relatively complex and hard to control. meanwhile, membranestructure would be more or less damaged during surface modi-fication [3,7]. therefore, it is of great interest to develop a facile,universal and easy-control method for preparation of membraneadsorbers with various substrates.inspired by the bio-adhesion property of marine mussels,dopamine (da) is known as a famous “bio-glue” due to its strongadhesion ability [9]. it can deposit on various substrates throughthe formation of strong covalent and noncovalent bonds with sur-faces under alkaline condition and air atmosphere (fig. 1a) [9–12].the formed polydopamine (pda) layer is bio-compatible and stable http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.063 0021-9673/© 2016 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved. 122 j. fan et al. / j. chromatogr. a 1448 (2016) 121–126 fig. 1. (a) possible reaction mechanism for dopamine polymerization [12] and (b) reaction mechanism of immobilization of thiol- and amino- containing compounds ontopda coating layer.in a relatively wide ph range. thanks to the catechols on the pda,the coated substrates have the versatility to link with thiol- andamino- containing compounds via michael addition and schiff-basereaction (fig. 1b) [13]. meanwhile, surface hydrophilicity and per-meability could be improved by the attached catechols and aminesgroups from deposited pda layer. nowadays, this modificationmethod has been widely used for membrane surface engineeringto meet various applications such as water purification, gas sepa-ration, energy generation, hemodialysis, catalysis [12,14–17], etc.however, to the best of our knowledge, there is no report regardingpreparation of membrane adsorbers based on pre-coated pda layer.it is well known that pei containing primary, secondary and tertiaryamino groups, could be used for anion-exchange chromatography[18]; ddm with its alkyl chains could be coupled on substrates forhydrophobic modification [13]; histidine (his) has been appliedfor affinity purification of igg from human serum [19]. based onthese knowledges, in the present study, polyethersulphone (pes)microfiltration membrane (it was more hydrophobic and inert thancellulose membrane but had much stronger mechanical strength)with a pda coating layer was employed as a versatile platform tolink pei, ddm and his molecules for preparation of anion-exchange,hydrophobic interaction and affinity membrane adsorbers (fig. 2).the separation performance of the obtained membrane adsorberswas then evaluated by a chromatography system. comparing withthe membrane modification and non-membrane adsorber prepa-ration by pda coating, there are some new scientific problems inthe preparation of the membrane adsorber for protein purification,such as adsorption selectivity and non-specific adsorption, whichneed to be clarified in the present work.2. materials and methods2.1. materialshuman serum albumin (hsa) and immunoglobulin g (igg)were provided by lanzhou institute of biological products co.ltd, china. a mustang coin units (0.35 ml) was purchased frompall corporation, usa. a high performance gfc column (tskgelg3000swxl) was purchased from tosoh bioscience llc. histidine(his), polyethylenimine (pei, average mn ∼60,000, average mw∼750,000), dodecyl mercaptan (ddm) and dopamine hydrochlo-ride were purchased from sigma-aldrich. polyethersulfone (pes)membranes with a 0.45 m pore size were bought from millipore,fig. 2. synthetic routes for anion-exchange, hydrophobic interaction and affinity membrane adsorbers via pda-coated membrane platform. j. fan et al. / j. chromatogr. a 1448 (2016) 121–126 123 usa. chemicals used for buffer preparation and sample analysiswere of analytical grade.2.2. preparation of membrane adsorbers based on pda-coatedpes membranedopamine hydrochloride was dissolved in tris-hcl solution(ph 8.8, 10 mm) with a concentration of 2 mg/ml. the pes mem-brane was then soaked in dopamine solution (20 ml in a flask)for 18 h (shaken at 25◦c and 100 rpm) to form pda depositionlayer. after pda coating, the membrane was taken out and rinsedthoroughly with deionized water for 2 h. the pda-coated mem-brane was immersed in pei aqueous solution (2 g/l, 20 ml) for8 h (shaken at 60◦c and 120 rpm) to construct anion-exchangemembrane adsorber. 0.3 m ddm dissolved in ethanol (20 ml) wasused to link aliphatic chain on pda-coated membrane by michaeladdition reaction for 72 h (shaken at 25◦c and 120 rpm). histidineimmobilization was carried out by immersing membrane for 72 h(shaken at 25◦c and 120 rpm) in a tris-hcl buffer (ph 7.4, 10 mm)with a histidine concentration of 20 mg/ml (20 ml). after ligandcoupling, the membranes were taken out and washed by deionizedwater or ethanol to remove the unreacted ligands. characteri-zation and measurement of membrane adsorbers (contact angle,transmembrane pressure, specific surface area, x-ray photoelec-tron spectroscopy (xps) and morphology, non-specific adsorption)are described in supporting information.2.3. separation of hsa/igg mixture by membranechromatographyfour pieces of modified membranes with a 16 mm diameterwere housed in the filter holder (mustang coin units, 0.35 ml)and then was integrated with chromatography system akta primeplus (ge healthcare) to perform the separation. the feed hsa/iggmixture was prepared in binding buffer (igg: 82.3%; hsa: 17.7%).for anion-exchange membrane chromatography, a 10 mm tris-hclbuffer at ph 6.0 was used as binding buffer, and such buffer with1 m nascn was used to elute adsorbed proteins; for hydropho-bic interaction membrane chromatography, 20 mm pb (phosphatebuffer) was used as an elution buffer, and such buffer with addi-tional 1 m as (ammonium sulfate) was used as binding buffer; foraffinity membrane chromatography, a 25 mm tris-hcl buffer at ph7.4 was used as binding buffer, and this buffer with additional 1 mnacl was used as an elution buffer. in these experiments, the mem-brane adsorber was first equilibrated with binding buffer followedby injection of 0.5 ml feed at 0.5 ml/min. the unbound proteinswere then removed by washing with binding buffer, and then thebound proteins were eluted using eluting buffer at 1 ml/min. the“flow-through peak” and “elution peak” samples in flow-throughand elution fractions respectively were collected and analyzed byhigh performance gel filtration. then, blank experiments usingpda-coated membrane were conducted under the same separa-tion conditions and their collected volume of elution fraction wasalso kept the same as that in former experiments. the sample assaywas described in supporting information.3. results and discussion3.1. preparation and characterization of membrane adsorbersdopamine spontaneously polymerized to form a pda layer byimmersing pes membrane (0.45 m pore size) into aqueous solu-tion (ph 8.8) for 18 h at an ambient temperature. in preliminarystudy, pda coating time from 6 to 24 h was examined, and withincreasing coating time, the contact angle decreased (fig. 3a), indi-cating that the hydrophilicity was improved with increasing pdacoating time. thus the fouling potential and non-specific adsorp-tion may decrease with the additional pda layer by reducing theundesirable hydrophobic interaction between membrane and pro-tein. on the other hand, the transmembrane pressure was graduallyfig. 3. (a) contact angles of membrane surfaces with different pda coating times. (b) transmembrane pressures for pes membranes with different pda coating times. (c)xps wide scans for the unmodified and modified pes membranes. (d) contact angles of different prepared membranes. 124 j. fan et al. / j. chromatogr. a 1448 (2016) 121–126 decreased at first due to the improved hydrophilicity (i.e. higherpermeability) by pda coating, then it increased with coating timefrom 12 h to 24 h (fig. 3b), which might be attributed to the increas-ing coverage of growing pda layer on membrane pores as describedby zhu et al. (they observed that water flux increased at initial stageof pda coating on polyethylene membrane and then decreased withtime) [20]. thus, 18 h was selected as a compromise for pda coat-ing. the specific surface area of pda-coated membrane is 10.9 m2/g,which did not change obviously compared with that for pristinemembrane (10.2 m2/g), indicating that adsorption capacity of themembrane was not significantly affected by pda coating. mean-while, sem image shows that there is no significant change in themorphology of membrane surface after pda deposition, althoughthe pore size after pda coating slightly decreased (fig. s1). thedeposition of pda was also confirmed by xps in fig. 3c. thereemerges a new n1s peak from the pda-coated membrane com-pared with pristine pes membrane and the s2p peak from pristinepes membrane was completely shielded by pda deposition. afterformation of a pda layer on the membrane surface, pei, ddm, hiswith amino- or thiol- groups were linked onto the catechol-richpda layer by simply immersing the pda-deposited membranesin the aqueous or organic solutions with functional molecules.as shown in fig. 3d, the contact angle decreased after pda coat-ing and then further decreased when the pda coating layer waslinked with pei chains, because pei with quantities of amino- couldimprove surface hydrophilicity [21]. moreover, the enhanced inten-sity of n1s peak from pei grafted membrane (fig. 3c) also confirmedthe successful pei grafting. when grafted with ddm, the contactangle of modified membrane increased expectedly as the aliphaticchains were exposed on the membrane surface (fig. 3d). the reap-pearance of s2p peak (fig. 3c) from ddm, verified that ddm hasbeen attached onto the pda layer. although the contact angle didnot change much after his immobilization, an increased compo-nent of c o and c n/c oh from his in deconvolution of the c1score-level spectrum (details are shown in fig. s2–3 and table s1)suggested that his has been immobilized on the membrane surface.after preparation of anion-exchange, hydrophobic interaction andaffinity membrane adsorbers using pda-coated pes membrane,their separation performance was then evaluated by fractionatingigg/hsa mixture (igg: 2.48 mg/ml; hsa: 1.30 mg/ml).3.2. separation performance of membrane adsorbersfour pieces of the modified membrane (approximately 0.1 ml)were stacked in a filter holder and then integrated with an aktaprime plus chromatography system to conduct separation exper-iments. the effluents from all peaks were collected for hplcanalysis. it is well known that ion-exchange based protein separa-tion is dependent on the different electrostatic attraction betweenproteins and charged ligands. to purify hsa from igg/hsa mix-ture by anion-exchange membrane adsorber, a tris-hcl buffer atph 6.0 was used as binding buffer for hsa adsorption (pi (iso-electric point) = 4.7, with negative charge) while igg (pi = 7-9, withpositive charge) would pass through, and the binding buffer withadditional 1 m nascn was used to elute adsorbed proteins. fromthe chromatogram shown in fig. s4a, a single peak occurred at bothflow-through and elution fractions respectively. according to hplcanalysis from fig. 4a, the peak area for hsa in flow-through frac-tion greatly decreased compared with that for igg, implying thathsa was preferentially adsorbed onto pei chains. thus, more hsawas eluted out by elution buffer, which was confirmed by a sin-gle hsa peak appeared in hplc graph (fig. 4a). the hsa puritywas increased from 17.7% to 96.7%, demonstrating a high selec-tivity of pei grafted membrane adsorber to the igg/hsa mixture.the recovery of hsa was 93.7 ± 2.5%, indicating that hsa couldbe effectively eluted by elution buffer. we also evaluated the non-specific igg adsorption by static binding experiment. after soakingthe pristine membrane and membrane absorber in igg solutionfor 10 h respectively, the igg binding of pristine pes membranewas 67.4 ± 24.0 g/cm2, while the pei-pda-coated membrane canhardly bind igg (the concentration of igg solution was almost thesame before and after static binding). thus, the fabricated mem-brane adsorber had a good resistance to the non-specific adsorption(potentially retarded membrane fouling).to evaluate the selectivity performance of hydrophobic mem-brane adsorber, igg purification from igg/hsa mixture was carriedout. ddm with dodecyl chain would adsorb proteins when thehydrophobic pockets on the protein surface were exposed bylyotropic salts, and then the adsorbed protein would be releasedby salt-free solution. as igg is more hydrophobic than hsa in bind-ing buffer (high ionic strength), it is prone to be adsorbed by ddmchains, and then, the adsorbed igg was eluted out by elution buffer(low ionic strength) (fig. s4b). the purity of igg reached 94.6%, andfig. 4. analysis results of feed, flow through and elution fractions obtained from (a) anion-exchange, (b) hydrophobic interaction and (c) affinity membrane adsorbers byhigh performance gel filtration chromatography at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. j. fan et al. / j. chromatogr. a 1448 (2016) 121–126 125 only trace hsa was co-eluted with igg as shown in fig. 4b. there-fore, it was concluded that a satisfying resolution of igg/hsa couldbe achieved by ddm attached membrane adsorber. the recovery ofigg (47.5 ± 5.2%) is relatively low, and the possible reason could bethe longer n-alkyl chain of ddm (c12) resulting in strong binding.the length of n-alkyl chain used in hydrophobic interaction chro-matography was usually between c1 and c8 [22]. aqueo-organicsolvents were possible to improve igg elution [22]. the blank mem-brane (pda-coated membrane without ligands) was used to testthe non-specific adsorption. by analysing the elution fraction, itwas found that only few igg was adsorbed on the membrane (fig.s5), implying that the negatively charged pda layer might capturesome positively charged igg (the ph of buffer system was 7.4).finally, purification of igg from igg/hsa mixture was conductedby his immobilized membrane adsorber. igg was adsorbed throughcarboxyl, amino, and imidazole group on his in a tris buffer at ph7.4 [19], while hsa totally passed through membranes accordingto the hplc analysis of flow-through fraction (fig. 4c). a singlepeak appeared at hplc graph for elution fraction, indicating thatelution peak (fig. s4c) only contained igg, therefore almost 100%purity of igg was achieved. although there is a little non-specificadsorption of igg by blank membranes (fig. s6), this novel affin-ity membrane chromatography shows the high selectivity to iggand hsa. the igg recovery is 73.6 ± 2.3%, and the elution buffercontaining some sodium dodecyl sulfonate might elute out moreigg and further increase the recovery [23]. the binding capacity ofanion-exchange, hydrophobic interaction membrane adsorbers is9.82 ± 0.36 mg/ml and 4.22 ± 0.41 mg/ml respectively (details aredescribed in supporting information), which is lower than that ofcommercial products (sartobind®q membrane (anion exchange,∼29 mg/ml) and sartobind®phenyl nano (hydrophobic interac-tion, ∼14 mg/ml)). the binding capacity of affinity membrane is15.83 ± 2.43 g/mg, which is higher than that of satorbind®pro-tein a 75 membrane (9.3 g/mg) [6]. as the testing protocols mightbe different, the above discussion was only a rough comparison.since the formation of pda layer could be affected by reaction time,temperature, as well as the surface roughness and surface chem-istry of the substrate [24,25], the binding capacity could be furtherimproved by optimizing reaction conditions and screening mem-branes which are more liable for pda adhesion. the above resultsshowed that these three kinds of membrane adsorbers developedwith pda intermediate layer was effective to separate hsa origg from igg/hsa mixture under high flow rate (nearly 5 mem-brane volume/min for loading and 10 membrane volume/min forwashing and elution). it is worth mentioning that the fabricationprocess is easy and under mild conditions without severe physicaltreatment, chemical reaction and toxic environment [12], which ishighly desirable for preparing membrane adsorbers in large-scaleand reducing the manufacturing costs.4. conclusionsthrough the strong covalent chemical bonds on pda coatinglayer, pei, ddm and his were successfully attached on membranesurface, thus endowing the membrane with a versatile adsorptionability for chromatography. these novel membrane adsorbers notonly exhibited high selectivity ability for fractionation of igg/hsamixture, but also had a negligible non-specific adsorption. since itis possible to link other ligands like cation-exchange, protein a andmultimodal ligands, etc., to fabricate various membrane adsorbersby appropriate reactions with the versatile pda-coated membraneplatform, the present work provides a new direction for facile fab-rication of membrane adsorbers, and the achieved high selectivityrecommends the corresponding membrane chromatography as apromising candidate for protein purification.acknowledgementsthis work was supported by the national high technologyresearch and development program of china (863 program, no.2014aa021006) and “100 talents program” of chinese academy ofsciences.appendix a. supplementary datasupplementary data associated with this article can be found, inthe online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.063.references[1] b.v. bhut, s.r. wickramasinghe, s.m. husson, preparation of high-capacity,weak anion-exchange membranes for protein separations usingsurface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization, j. membr. sci. 325(2008) 176–183.[2] j. fan, j. luo, w. song, x. chen, y. wan, directing membrane chromatographyto manufacture  1-antitrypsin from human plasma fraction iv, j.chromatogr. a 1423 (2015) 63–70.[3] t. honjo, k. hoe, s. tabayashi, t. tanaka, j. shimada, m. goto, h. matsuyama,t. maruyama, preparation of affinity membranes using thermally inducedphase separation for one-step purification of recombinant proteins, anal.biochem. 434 (2013) 269–274.[4] r. ghosh, protein separation using membrane chromatography: opportunitiesand challenges, j. chromatogr. a 952 (2002) 13–27.[5] d. yu, m.d. mclean, j.c. hall, r. ghosh, purification of a humanimmunoglobulin g1 monoclonal antibody from transgenic tobacco usingmembrane chromatographic processes, j. chromatogr. a 1187 (2008)128–137.[6] z. ma, s. ramakrishna, electrospun regenerated cellulose nanofiber affinitymembrane functionalized with protein a/g for igg purification, j. membr. sci.319 (2008) 23–28.[7] h.c. yang, j.q. luo, y. lv, p. shen, z.k. xu, surface engineering of polymermembranes via mussel-inspired chemistry, j. membr. sci. 483 (2015) 42–59.[8] a.h.m. yusof, m. ulbricht, polypropylene-based membrane adsorbers viaphoto-initiated graft copolymerization: optimizing separation performanceby preparation conditions, j. membr. sci. 311 (2008) 294–305.[9] h. lee, s.m. dellatore, w.m. miller, p.b. messersmith, mussel-inspired surfacechemistry for multifunctional coatings, science 318 (2007) 426–430.[10] a. nematollahzadeh, a. shojaei, m.j. abdekhodaie, b. sellergren, molecularlyimprinted polydopamine nano-layer on the pore surface of porous particlesfor protein capture in hplc column, j. colloid interface sci. 404 (2013)117–126.[11] a. nematollahzadeh, p. lindemann, w. sun, j. stute, d. lutkemeyer, b.sellergren, robust and selective nano cavities for protein separation: aninterpenetrating polymer network modified hierarchically protein imprintedhydrogel, j. chromatogr. a 1345 (2014) 154–163.[12] q. liu, n.y. wang, j. caro, a.s. huang, bio-inspired polydopamine: a versatileand powerful platform for covalent synthesis of molecular sieve membranes,j. am. chem. soc. 135 (2013) 17679–17682.[13] a. vaish, d.j. vanderah, l.j. richter, m. dimitriou, k.l. steffens, m.l. walker,dithiol-based modification of poly(dopamine): enabling protein resistance viashort-chain ethylene oxide oligomers, chem. commun. 51 (2015) 6591–6594.[14] y.f. li, y.l. su, x.t. zhao, x. he, r.n. zhang, j.j. zhao, x.c. fan, z.y. jiang,antifouling, high-flux nanofiltration membranes enabled by dual functionalpolydopamine, acs appl. mater. interfaces 6 (2014) 5548–5557.[15] j.q. luo, a.s. meyer, r.v. mateiu, d. kalyani, m. pinelo, functionalization of amembrane sublayer using reverse filtration of enzymes and dopaminecoating, acs appl. mater. interfaces 6 (2014) 22894–22904.[16] l.j. cao, f.c. lv, y. liu, w.x. wang, y.f. huo, x.z. fu, r. sun, z.g. lu, a highperformance o-2 selective membrane based on cau-1-nh2@polydopamineand the pmma polymer for li-air batteries, chem. commun. 51 (2015)4364–4367.[17] l. ma, h. qin, c. cheng, y. xia, c. he, c.x. nie, l.r. wang, c.s. zhao,mussel-inspired self-coating at macro-interface with improvedbiocompatibility and bioactivity via dopamine grafted heparin-like polymersand heparin, j. mater. chem. b 2 (2014) 363–375.[18] l.l. yu, s.p. tao, x.y. dong, y. sun, protein adsorption topoly(ethylenimine)-modified sepharose ff: i. a critical ionic capacity fordrastically enhanced capacity and uptake kinetics, j. chromatogr. a 1305(2013) 76–84.[19] r.r. prasanna, a.s. kamalanathan, m.a. vijayalakshmi, development ofl-histidine immobilized cim®monolithic disks for purification ofimmunoglobulin g, j. mol. recognit. 28 (2015) 129–141.[20] z.y. xi, y.y. xu, l.p. zhu, y. wang, b.k. zhu, a facile method of surfacemodification for hydrophobic polymer membranes based on the adhesivebehavior of poly(dopa) and poly(dopamine), j. membr. sci. 327 (2009)244–253. 126 j. fan et al. / j. chromatogr. a 1448 (2016) 121–126 [21] r.n. zhang, y.l. su, x.t. zhao, y.f. li, j.j. zhao, z.y. jiang, a novel positivelycharged composite nanofiltration membrane prepared by bio-inspiredadhesion of polydopamine and surface grafting of poly(ethylene imine), j.membr. sci. 470 (2014) 9–17.[22] j.c. janson, protein purification: principles, high resolution methods, andapplications, john wiley & sons, 2012.[23] z.w. xia, z.a. lin, y. xiao, l. wang, j.n. zheng, h.h. yang, g.n. chen, facilesynthesis of polydopamine-coated molecularly imprinted silica nanoparticlesfor protein recognition and separation, biosens. bioelectron. 47 (2013)120–126.[24] j.h. jiang, l.p. zhu, l.j. zhu, b.k. zhu, y.y. xu, surface characteristics of aself-polymerized dopamine coating deposited on hydrophobic polymer films,langmuir 27 (2011) 14180–14187.[25] b.d. mccloskey, h.b. park, h. ju, b.w. rowe, d.j. miller, b.j. chun, k. kin, b.d.freeman, influence of polydopamine deposition conditions on pure water fluxand foulant adhesion resistance of reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, andmicrofiltration membranes, polymer 51 (2010) 3472–3485.
