<<<<<<< head 715 © the author(s) 2018. published by oxford university press on behalf of entomological society of america. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com. physiological ecology novel temperature-dependent development rate models for postdiapause egg eclosion of three important arthropod pests found in commercial christmas tree plantations of southern québec, canada j.-f. doherty, j.-f. guay, and c. cloutier1 département de biologie, université laval, 1045 avenue de la médecine, ville de québec, qc, g1v 0a6, canada, and 1corresponding author, e-mail: conrad.cloutier@bio.ulaval.ca subject editor: colin brent received 16 august 2017; editorial decision 3 january 2018 abstract the balsam twig aphid mindarus abietinus koch (hemiptera: aphididae), the spruce spider mite oligonychus ununguis (jacobi) (acari: tetranychidae), and the pine needle scale chionaspis pinifoliae (fitch) (hemiptera: diaspididae) are three important pests for the christmas tree industry of québec, canada. temperaturedependent development rates for postdiapause overwintering eggs of these species have never been studied for populations of southern québec, where the vast majority of christmas trees are grown. the accumulation of physiological time in growing degree days (gdd) is a standard tool to predict egg eclosion dates for pests, when first generation immatures are most vulnerable to insecticidal control. development rates for postdiapause eggs were tested at four or five constant temperatures in the 11–23°c range under controlled conditions, based on time before hatching for eggs collected in a balsam fir plantation in late winter. the standard linear model and three published nonlinear models were fitted to the data and compared for their ability to estimate key biological temperature parameters and to predict development rates of postdiapause eggs. validation of model predictions of egg eclosion time on balsam fir in the field was reasonably accurate using the classical linear model where field-accumulated gdd were calculated with a particular interpretation of the average method based on daily maximum and minimum temperatures. the linear model could predict mean egg eclosion within around 5 d of eclosion dates observed in the field. résumé le puceron des pousses du sapin mindarus abietinus koch (hemiptera : aphididae), le tétranyque de l’épinette oligonychus ununguis (jacobi) (acari : tetranychidae) et la cochenille des aiguilles du pin chionaspis pinifoliae (fitch) (hemiptera : diaspididae) sont d’importants ravageurs des arbres de noël au québec. le développement des oeufs hivernants postdiapausants, en fonction de la température, n’a jamais été étudié pour les populations du sud du québec, où cette culture est concentrée. l’accumulation du temps physiologique en degrés-jours de croissance (dj) est un outil essentiel pour prédire la date d’éclosion des oeufs de ravageurs, alors que les immatures de première génération sont vulnérables aux traitements insecticides. le taux de développement des oeufs hivernants a été mesuré en conditions contrôlées pour quatre ou cinq températures constantes dans la gamme 11–23°c, calculé selon le temps de développement jusqu’à l’éclosion d’oeufs collectés sur le sapin baumier. le modèle linéaire standard et trois modèles non linéaires publiés ont été évalués pour leur capacité à prédire les paramètres biologiques de réponse à la température et le taux de développement. la prédiction de l’éclosion des oeufs sur le terrain a été validée avec le calcul du temps physiologique accumulé en dj avec une interprétation particulière de la méthode des moyennes basée sur les températures quotidiennes maximales et minimales, en association avec le modèle linéaire. cela a permis de prédire l’éclosion printanière sur le terrain à environ cinq jours près. key words: temperature, modeling, postdiapause, development, abies balsamea environmental entomology, 47(3), 2018, 715–724 doi: 10.1093/ee/nvy003 advance access publication date: 17 february 2018 research downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/47/3/715/4868565 by hong kong metropolitan university user on 08 april 2025 introduction temperature-dependent development in insects and mites is an important physiological trait that can strongly influence population dynamics, therefore it is often studied for pest management purposes (roy et al. 2002, trudgill et al. 2005, sandhu et al. 2010, moore and remais 2014). apart from rare exceptions (heinrich 1974), poikilothermic life processes respond to daily temperature fluctuations and, on a larger time scale, to seasonal trends in temperature (speight et al. 2008). when testing the effects of temperature on arthropod development, models can be used to describe this relation and predict pest activity. in turn, reasonably accurate models can help reduce the use of pesticides and the costs of treatments. for these reasons, this study focuses on three conifer arthropods notably considered as pests in commercial christmas tree plantations of southern québec, canada. the rate of development rdev for poikilotherms, simply estimated as the reciprocal of time (e.g., hours or days) taken to reach maturity or to complete specific life stages (roy et al. 2002), varies systematically according to temperatures above freezing and below the tolerable maximum (speight et al. 2008, moore and remais 2014). this relation has been variously described mathematically first with the classical linear model (ikemoto and takai 2000, trudgill et al. 2005) and also with several nonlinear models (e.g., table 1 in zahiri et al. 2010). with nonlinear models, the thermal dependence of development rates is characterized by three theoretical biological temperature parameters: the low and high temperature thresholds (tmin and tmax), and the optimal temperature (topt). in this three-parameter mathematical representation, the rdev is nil at tmin, increases in a quasilinear fashion between tmin and topt where, rather than increasing further linearly, it is maximal and plummets rapidly to become nil again at tmax (brière et al. 1999, trudgill et al. 2005, paaijmans et al. 2013). for christmas tree growers targeting timely control of pests during their most vulnerable development stages, thermal requirements are most easily approximated using physiological time or time needed to develop at temperatures above threshold, expressed as growing degree days (gdd), which is derived from the linear model. this time is assumed to be fixed for a given life stage and is thus often reported as a ‘thermal constant’ (k), directly obtained using the reciprocal of the slope from the linear model (ikemoto and takai 2000, trudgill et al. 2005). the linear model can provide an accurate prediction of emergence for a target pest stage if field temperatures generally fall within the intermediate viable range below topt, where development rate is linearly related to temperature or nearly so (bergant and trdan 2006). the most commonly used method to calculate the amount of gdd accumulated daily is based on the difference between the mean temperature, calculated from the maximum and minimum, and the development threshold (mcmaster and wilhelm 1997). in practice, the linear model-based prediction for the occurrence of a final step (e.g., egg eclosion) is based simply on cumulative daily gdd to reach the specific thermal constant of the development stage of interest. thus, for linear modeling in pest monitoring, tmin and k are needed along with temperatures that generally represent those experienced by arthropods in the field, in order to predict when a pest completes a given life stage. from the many nonlinear models available, some are more commonly used than others to model temperature-dependent development rates in poikilotherms (roy et al. 2002). although they do not estimate a thermal constant like the linear model, they could also be used in modeling and provide three critical temperature parameters (i.e., tmin, topt, and tmax), which are useful for quantifying the thermal limits of the organism at a particular stage. the hilbert and logan, lactin-2, and kontodimas-16 models tested here can estimate all three parameters mentioned above (hilbert and logan 1983, lactin et al. 1995, kontodimas et al. 2004). these nonlinear models account for the curvilinear nature of development rates for the whole range of temperatures, including limiting ones near the thresholds for the studied species. in commercial christmas tree plantations, the balsam twig aphid mindarus abietinus koch (hemiptera: aphididae) is an important pest of balsam fir abies balsamea (l.) miller (pinaceae) and fraser fir abies fraseri (pursh) poiret (pinaceae) (nettleton and hain 1982, bradbury and osgood 1986, fondren and mccullough 2003). its life cycle is complex and begins in the spring with the asexual fundatrix, or stem mother, which emerges from an overwintering egg in early may in southern québec (deland et al. 1998, doherty et al. 2017). when fir buds break open, developing aphids of this first generation, which up to bud break had fed on shoots of the previous year, migrate onto the young current-year shoots to feed, where they mature and viviparously produce the second generation of aphids, thus forming a colony (varty 1968). the growing colony stunts the growth of shoots and deforms their needles, thus creating a pseudogall, which protects the aphid colony, but reduces the aesthetic value of commercial christmas trees, especially during the last 2 yr before tree harvest (nettleton and hain 1982). therefore, insecticidal treatments against m. abietinus should be most effective before the migration of the immature stem mothers onto the newly expanding shoots, when they are most exposed (kleintjes 1997). estimates of m. abietinus for tmin and k for egg eclosion are available for new brunswick, canada and southern québec (varty 1968, deland et al. 1998), but are based primarily on field observations (table 1), instead of determination under controlled conditions at experimentally fixed temperatures, as usually indicated (brière et al. 1999, roy et al. 2002, trudgill et al. 2005). the spruce spider mite oligonychus ununguis (jacobi) (acari: tetranychidae) is also considered a pest in commercial christmas tree plantations, especially on fraser fir (boyne and hain 1983, table 1. previous estimates of physiological time required for egg eclosion of three arthropod species overwintering as diapause eggs on fir. gdd estimates assume that development rates increase linearly with temperature species estimate of thermal constant over development threshold estimation method (source) mindarus abietinus 95 gdd over 2°c field observations only (deland et al. 1998) oligonychus ununguis 143.3 gdd over 7.1°c one experimental temperature tested (richmond and shetlar 1996) chionaspis pinifoliae 136.0 gdd over 10.8°ca eight experimental temperatures tested (burden and hart 1989) agdd model for c. pinifoliae egg development based solely on hatching time at a constant 18.5°c (threshold estimated between 10.8°c and 11.8°c); first generation. 716 environmental entomology, 2018, vol. 47, no. 3 downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/47/3/715/4868565 by hong kong metropolitan university user on 08 april 2025 richmond and shetlar 1996, cloutier et al. 2009). in southern québec, its life cycle typically begins in mid-may when first-generation mites emerge from overwintering eggs (cloutier et al. 2009). the larvae and nymphs feed by sucking out the cellular contents of fir needles, which causes the yellowing and bronzing of foliage (kielczewski 1966). during severe infestations of o. ununguis on fir, needle abscission, reduction in shoot growth, and even premature death of the host tree can occur (löytteniemi 1971, johnson and lyon 1991). relatively warm and dry conditions increase the fecundity of females, and four to five generations may be observed from late spring to early fall in southern québec (boyne and hain 1983, cloutier et al. 2009). as for the balsam twig aphid, the period for optimal control of o. ununguis rests just after the larvae of the first generation have emerged from the overwintering eggs. a thermal constant for overwintering egg hatching is available for populations of o. ununguis in ohio (table 1) (richmond and shetlar 1996). as for the pine needle scale chionaspis pinifoliae (fitch) (hemiptera: diaspididae), its presence is commonly reported not only on both balsam and fraser firs in commercial christmas tree plantations but also on other ornamental pine and spruce conifer species (miller et al. 2005). in québec, c. pinifoliae has the status of an emerging pest of christmas trees and is not known to cause any significant damage. although not generally monitored by growers, it can be an obstacle for exportation. in canada, it is a univoltine species, whereas in the united states, a second generation has been observed (cumming 1953, nielsen and johnson 1973). both sexual and parthenogenetic forms have been documented (stimmann 1969, luck and dahlsten 1974). typically, the hatching of overwintering eggs occurs around mid-june, after which the mobile crawlers settle rapidly on the needles to pursue development and secrete their protective scale (cumming 1953, martel and sharma 1968), thus limiting the time window when these insects are exposed and vulnerable to insecticide treatments. gdd models and thermal response data exist for the pine needle scale (table 1), but are based on populations in iowa and michigan, usa (burden and hart 1989, fondren and mccullough 2005). the objective of this study was to test the effect of temperature on postdiapause egg development rates for populations of m. abietinus, o. ununguis, and c. pinifoliae in southern québec. also, we aimed to develop practical models to estimate thermal requirements (i.e., physiological time) for egg eclosion and associated temperature parameters (tmin, topt, tmax, and k) for all three species. we hypothesize that the available thermal constants previously estimated for these arthropod pests are not representative of the populations found in southern québec. optimizing development models for local populations of these species could provide a better understanding of the effects of climate on spring hatching and facilitate their control, thus maximizing the efficacy of pesticide treatments and reducing their frequency in commercial christmas tree plantations. materials and methods sample collection and experimental arenas eggs from m. abietinus and o. ununguis were collected on balsam fir shoots in a commercial christmas tree plantation (45.905°n, 71.036°w) near the municipality of courcelles, in the estrie administrative region of southern québec, canada. samples were collected on the 6-iii-2017, 13-iii-2017, and 20-iii-2017, when fir trees were still partially covered with snow. since development rates calculated from all three collection dates did not vary significantly and only a small number of eggs were collected at each date, all data were pooled for analysis. shoots (n = 200) were randomly cut in a plot of ~675 trees (i.e., 15 rows of 45 trees), from their southern side. to avoid premature development within the egg after collection, all samples were kept at ~2°c, assumed to be near tmin, until examined in the laboratory. when an egg was found, the shoot was cut down to about 1 cm in length and the needles were carefully removed with a razor blade. shoot sections with eggs were placed in 2-ml microtubes (starstedt ag & co., nümbrecht, north rhine-westphalia, germany) with small holes pierced through the lid for air circulation. for manipulation purposes, two m. abietinus eggs were put into each microtube. oligonychus ununguis eggs were usually clustered onto single shoots, so one randomly selected shoot section, containing several eggs, was allotted per microtube. all c. pinifoliae eggs were collected on the 13-iii-2017 from another plantation (45.950°n, 70.923°w) near the municipality of saint-évariste-de- forsyth, ~10 km from the first site, from a single-generation parthenogenetic form of the scale. egg clusters, hidden beneath the waxy scale, were carefully removed with a fine brush, mixed together, and randomly distributed in microtubes (~20 eggs per microtube, see above). throughout the experiment, we ensured that around 10 μl of water was kept inside the lid of all microtubes with eggs, in order to maintain constant high humidity. preliminary data, obtained in 2015 for a 25°c constant temperature regime for m. abietinus and o. ununguis and a fluctuating temperature regime for c. pinifoliae (i.e., 16 h at 25°c and 8 h at 30°c), were used as starting points to estimate the high temperature threshold tmax for nonlinear development rate models. in 2016, eggs of all three species were collected similarly in the plantations described above on the 4-iv-2016, for a preliminary experiment on their developmental response to temperature. unfortunately, eggs were collected too late in 2016 to provide meaningful estimates, but these preliminary data provided key information on appropriate collection dates and experimental temperatures for the critical experiment in 2017. experimental temperatures experiments on postdiapause development of overwintering eggs as a function of temperature were started in march 2017. we used conviron e15 (controlled environments ltd., winnipeg, manitoba, canada) growth chambers set to provide a photoperiod of 16:8 (l:d) h and 65% rh. on the basis of preliminary data (see above), five constant temperature regimes (11, 14, 17, 20, and 23°c) were used. only the four higher temperatures were tested for o. ununguis due to a limiting number of egg clusters. experimental temperature and relative humidity were recorded hourly inside each growth chamber with an hobo pro v2 data logger (onset, cape cod, ma, usa), which confirmed that experimental temperatures remained within ±0.5°c. analytical methods eggs were inspected daily for hatching and mortality (i.e., failure to hatch). the estimated time to egg eclosion was assumed to have occurred at midpoint between two consecutive observations (±12-h precision). in addition, all unhatched eggs were kept for at least a week after the last observed hatch in the growth chamber, in order to assure that an accurate rate of survival was recorded. development rate models apart from the gdd linear model, three nonlinear development rate models, commonly used for illustrating temperature-dependent development in poikilotherms (kontodimas et al. 2004), were tested environmental entomology, 2018, vol. 47, no. 3 717 downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/47/3/715/4868565 by hong kong metropolitan university user on 08 april 2025 (table 2). for model selection, two criteria were used (roy et al. 2002): first, the model should describe the experimental data accurately, therefore the coefficient of determination (r2) and the mean squared error (mse) were compared between nonlinear models; second, the model should be able to predict field egg eclosion within an acceptable timeframe in order to apply the appropriate control measures in a timely fashion in a plantation (trudgill et al. 2005). field validation to validate development rate models parametrized in the laboratory, the appearance of newly hatched immatures for the three species was recorded in the field, if present, during three consecutive springs (i.e., from 2015 to 2017) and compared with model predictions. for m. abietinus and o. ununguis, ~50 eggs or larvae were examined on shoots in the plantations described above on a weekly basis in 2015 and 2016, around the time when eggs supposedly hatched in the region, for at least 3 wk. for c. pinifoliae, shoots bearing scales were brought to the laboratory for closer inspection. in 2017, model predictions for egg eclosion of m. abietinus and c. pinifoliae were validated by observing shoots collected on the mean hatching day as predicted by the linear model. to calculate the accumulation of gdd in the plantation for a given day, we used an alternative interpretation of the average method (equation 1) employed primarily in crop research (mcmaster and wilhelm 1997, moore and remais 2014), which accounts for frequent temperature fluctuation around the developmental threshold (tmin): gdd max min min = +  
