management science vol. 66, no. 6, june 2020, pp. 2796–2799 http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mnsc issn 0025-1909 (print), issn 1526-5501 (online) aging population, retirement, and risk taking: reply haim levya a school of business, the hebrew university of jerusalem, jerusalem 91905, israel contact: mshlevy@huji.ac.il, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8623-3507 (hl) received: june 25, 2018 revised: august 26, 2019; november 26, 2018 accepted: september 6, 2019 published online in articles in advance: may 6, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3518 copyright: © 2020 informs abstract. in theorem 1 given in my paper, “aging population, retirement, and risk taking” [levy h (2016a) aging population, retirement, and risk taking. management sci. 62(5):1415–1430.], there is indeed a technical error. yet, adding one condition to the theorem (which can be added in two alternate ways) is sufficient to ensure the dominance of stocks over bonds in the very long run. for the commonly employed preferences, the empirical evidence conforms with the claim given in my original theorem 1, asserting that the portfolio with the higher geometric mean (stocks) dominates the other portfolio under consideration (bonds) as the investment horizon increases indefinitely. thus, as advocated in my paper, stocks dominate bonds for investors with typical preferences who save for retirement. history: accepted by karl deither, finance. keywords: asymptotic stochastic dominance • investment horizon • stocks for the long run 1. introduction iwould like to thank rachel j. huang, larry y. tzeng, jr-yan wang, and lin zhao, as well as moshe levy for correcting a technical error in my paper (see levy 2016a), and particularly for extending the results of my paper in several interesting directions.1 their comments also shedmore light on the important longstanding debate of whether stocks (which have a higher geometric mean than bonds) dominate bonds in the very long run, and hence whether the well-known assertion of “stocks for the long run” is valid. i divide my reply to both comments into two categories: the theoretical analysis and the empirical evidence. 2. the theoretical analysis first, in my paper levy (2016a), there is indeed a technical error with an implication to theorem 1. two cumulative normal distributions, f and g (which in the specific case analyzed in my paper are the distributions of log-returns), have at most one intersection point given by x0  μf σg − μgσf ( ) (σg − σf) , (1) where μ and σ stand for the mean and standard deviation of these two distributions, respectively. assuming independence over time and a t-period investment horizon, the intersection point of the two distributions of the log-terminal wealth is given by x0  t μf σg − μgσf ( ) (σg − σf) . (2) in mypaper (levy 2016a), iwrote that the intersection point between two normal distributions is given by z0  μf − μg ( ) (σg − σf) for t  1, (3) and that for t > 1, it is given by z0  ̅̅ t √ μf − μg ( ) (σg − σf) (4) (see equation (3) in levy 2016a). note that both equations (1) and (3) are correct. however, equation (3) gives the intersection point in terms of the standardized normal distribution z0 and equation (1) gives the intersection point in terms of the nonstandardized normal distribution x0.2 for the dominance analysis the intersection point given by x0 is the relevant one, but i mistakenly used z0. unfortunately, this scribal error occurred and it has an implication to the conditions for dominance given in theorem 1, which i correct in this reply. let me first state the original theorem 1 as a reference point and then state, in two alternate ways (corresponding to the comments from huang et al. 2019 and levy 2019), the additional conditions required to guarantee the dominance of f over g. note first that in the analysis below we rely on the following well-known relations: if log(x) is normally distributed, then the variable x is log-normally distributed and when log(x)→+∞, x→+∞, and when log(x)→−∞, x→0. theorem 1. assume an investment horizon of t periods and that wt(f) and wt (g) are log-normal distributions. 2796 assume that μf>μg; namely, f has a higher geometric mean than g. then, for t→∞, f (with the larger geometric mean) dominates g by almost first-degree stochastic dominance (afsd) if and only if μf >μg and σf ≥σg, provided that the marginal utility is bounded (see levy 2016a). note that the parameters given in theorem 1 correspond to log-returns. to avoid confusion in the rest of my reply, i denote by z0 the intersection point of the standardized normal distributions, by x0 the intersection point of the two corresponding nonstandardized normal distributions (see endnote 2), and by l0 the intersection point of the corresponding two lognormal distributions. as explainedabove,equation(2) (and not equation (4)) is the relevant one for determining the dominance relation, and therefore theorem1 should be modified. one way to modify theorem 1, as emerges indirectly from the comment of huang et al. (2019), is to add to theorem 1 the condition μf/σf >μg/σg and “iff” should be replaced by “if.” with the additional requirement that μf/σf >μg/σg, it is easy to see that t→∞ implies that x0→ −∞ for the normal distributions, and therefore l0→0 for the corresponding lognormal distributions. thus, in the whole range f (with the higher geometric mean) is located below g, and hence the dominance of f over g in the long run (afsd) is obtained. huang et al. (2019) correctly claim that theoretically we may have dominance also in the case where σf < σg, and hence the condition σf ≥ σg is not a necessary condition for dominance. therefore, in the modified theorem given below, i replaced “iff” by “if.” while in a comparison of any two prospects the relation σf < σg is generally possible, it is irrelevant to my paper, as i analyze whether stocks dominate bonds for the long run, and with empirical data we have σf > σg (see the empirical data given below). moreover, the problem with this modification is that when stocks and bonds are compared, generally the condition μf/σf >μg/σg does not conform with empirical data. therefore, we need to rely on the dominance suggestion given in the comment of levy (2019), who allows also the case μf/σf <μg/σg that conforms to the empirical evidence. let us elaborate. first, m. levy’s comment also corrects the intersection point formula that i employed in my paper and shows that as t→∞, the intersection point of the two log-normal distributions either approaches 0 or +∞. m. levy shows that my original claim of the superiority of the portfolio with the higher geometric mean remains intact if one also adds a lower bound on the marginal utility, namely, u ≥mlb, where mlb stands for the bound suggested by m. levy. combining the suggestions given in the two comments, i revise theorem 1 by adding the lower bound suggested by m. levy as follows. revised theorem 1. assume an investment horizon of t periods and that wt(f) and wt (g) are log-normal distributions where f and g stand for the distribution of stocks and bonds, respectively. assume that σf > σg and that the marginal utility is bounded from above (as suggested in levy 2016a) and also from below (as suggested by levy 2019). then, μf >μg (namely, f has a higher geometric mean than g) is a sufficient condition for dominance of f over g by afsd. proof. the correct intersection point of the two normal distributions can be rewritten as x0  ( μf σf − μg σg )/( 1 σf − 1 σg ) ≡ a/b. for t > 1, it is given by tx0 (see equations (1) and (2) in levy 2019). as we assume that σf(stocks) > σg(bonds), the denominator term b is negative. there are two extreme possible locations of the intersection point and we consider below each possible location separately. 1. if a is positive, thenwe have that as t→∞, l0→0 and f dominates g, as claimed in my original theorem 1. 2. if a is negative, then when t→∞, we have that l0→∞ and we need to add levy’s (2019) lower bound on the marginal utility to guarantee dominance of f over g (the proof of this case is given in levy 2019). thus, one can modify my original theorem 1 in two alternate directions to maintain its result of the dominance of stocks over bonds in the very long run: (a) adding a lower-bound constraint on the marginal utility (as suggested by m. levy), or (b) adding to the original theorem 1 the condition μf/σf >μg/σg. however, as we see below, the condition μf/σf> μg/σg does not hold empirically. therefore, we focus on the suggestion ofm. levy to add a lower bound on the marginal utility. note that, as the conditions for dominance are sufficient and not necessary, it even strengthens the assertion “stocks for the long run,” as stocks may dominate bonds even in cases where one of the conditions does not hold, let alone when the conditions hold. 3. the empirical evidence the interesting question is whether the added conditions needed to guarantee dominance of f over g have empirical support. table 1 provides the empirical parameters of logreturns for stocks, bonds, and treasury bills. as can be seen from this table, the mean return of stocks is much larger than the corresponding means of bonds and treasury bills, respectively. but what is more relevant to the issue analyzed inmy paper is that levy: aging population and risk taking management science, 2020, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2796–2799, © 2020 informs 2797 the standard deviation for stocks is 0.195, much larger than the corresponding figure for bonds (0.075). therefore, the case σf <σg is practically irrelevant to the issue of whether stocks dominate bonds in the long run. finally, we have, empirically, that μf/σf<μg/σg (see table 1); therefore, the additional condition μf/σf> μg/σg , although theoretically possible, has no empirical support. in sum, while with the empirical data we have σf >σg and the case σf < σg is empirically irrelevant, theoretically, the additional required condition for the sufficiency side of theorem 1 as suggested by huang et al. (2019) is needed. in addition, the condition μf/σf > μg/σg does not hold empirically when bonds and stocks are compared. therefore, we focus below on the more relevant condition suggested by levy (2019) for the dominance of stocks over bonds in the case where μf/σf < μg/σg, a case which has strong empirical support (see table 1). we turn to the empirical implications of the theoretical criticisms of levy (2019). first, note that it is assumed that μf >μg and σf > σg, which conform with the empirical data where stocks and bonds are considered. because empirically we find that also μf/σf< μg/σg (see table 1), the empirically relevant intersection point is given by l0→∞. therefore, we need to address the comment and approach of levy (2019). he correctly claims that in this case one needs to impose a lower bound on themarginal utility to guarantee dominance of stocks over bonds in the very long run. the empirical question is wheth-er the needed empirical lower bound holds for all (or for most) economically relevant utility functions. levy (2019) investigates a few functions attemp-ting to show that the lower bound does not hold, hence refuting the assertion that stocks dominate bonds in the long run. reading carefully his comment, it seems that levy (2019) struggles to find some specific preferences for which the required lower bound does not hold and bonds provide a higher expected utility than stocks. indeed, he shows empirically that for exponential preference u(x)  −e−4x and for the utility function u(x)  u(x)  (x + a)1−α/(1 − α) with α  10 the required condition on the marginal utility does not hold, and also that bonds are better than stocks for the long run. however, for a more reasonable risk-aversion parameter α  0.5 or even α ≤ 2, stocks provide a higher expected utility than bonds in the long run, which conforms with the claim in theorem 1. my response to these results is that they rather support my argument of “stocks (with the higher geometric mean) for the long run.” first, the exponential utility function with the relevant parameters has the deficiency of the “blank check” paradox (see markowitz et al. 1994, p. 89). in their words: “an immediate consequence is this: if the investor has rra ≥1, as many believe is true and/or desirable, and rc > ln2, as do most of our respondents, then the investor cannot have an exponential utility function.” by the same token, using the generalized myopic utility function with α  10 (for which the required lower-bound condition does not hold and bonds are preferred over stocks) is irrelevant, as the relative risk-aversion parameter α is typically estimated to be at most 2, and most researches claim that it is even smaller than 1 (see mehra and prescott 1985 and references within). thus, it seems to be very hard, if not impossible, to find nonpathological utility functions with economically relevant parameters where the lower bound suggested by levy (2019) on the marginal utility function is not met and bonds are preferred to stocks. therefore, it seems that, for virtually all commonly employed utility functions, we have a dominance of stocks over bonds for the long run, as i claimed in my original paper. levy (2019) derives a closed-form solution for the portfolio-choice problem of constant relative risk aversion (crra) investors under the assumption of log-normal return distributions. he finds that with the empirical parameters, stocks are preferred to bonds for all crra investorswith a relative riskaversion coefficient smaller than 3.9. this, once again, supportsmyclaim of the dominance of stocks over bonds, as most estimates of the risk-aversion parameter available in the literature, as mentioned above, indicate that the risk-aversion parameter is even smaller than 2. to sum up, in general, as t→∞, the intersection point of the two log-normal distributions is either approaching zero or infinity. if it approaches zero, then stocks dominate bonds, as advocated in my paper. if it approaches infinity, then we need to add also a lower bound on the marginal utility to guarantee that stocks dominate bonds in the long run. alternatively, one can also add the condition μf/σf> μg/σg to make my theorem 1 sufficient (but not necessary) without the need to add m. levy’s lower bound. while this path may be useful in some cases, in comparing stocks to bonds for the long run, this approach is irrelevant, as, empirically, μf/σf <μg/σg. thus, to guarantee a dominance of stocks over bonds table 1. the mean and standard deviation of log-returns treasury bills corporate bonds stocks (s&p 500) μ 0.034 0.060 0.097 σ 0.029 0.075 0.195 μ/σ 1.172 0.800 0.497 source. levy 2016b, p. 383. note. the calculations are based on annual return for the period 1926–2013. levy: aging population and risk taking 2798 management science, 2020, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2796–2799, © 2020 informs in the long run, we need the lower bound on the marginal utility as suggested by levy (2019). empirically, stocks have a higher geometric mean return (and obviously also a higher arithmetic mean return), a higher variance, and a smaller μ/σ than the corresponding parameters of bonds. therefore, one needs a utility function with a relatively large riskaversion parameter to reveal a preference for bonds. indeed, there is empirically a preference for bonds with exponential preferences with an absolute riskaversion parameter greater than 4, or myopic utility functions with a relative risk-aversion parameter greater than 10. these two cases are not accepted by virtually all economists, as the risk-aversion parameter is much smaller; hence, with the relevant parameters, stocks are preferred to bonds. acknowledgments i amgrateful to the departmental editor, karl diether, and the anonymous referee for their helpful suggestions. endnotes 1 in two recent papers on this topic, huang et al. (2020b) and levy (2019) suggest additional interesting extensions. m. levy shows in proposition 1 of his paper that if the distributions of returns of portfolios are log-normal, then the crra investor will choose the portfolio with the highest value of μ + σ(1 − α)/2, where (1 − α) denotes the relative risk-aversion index of the crra investor. huang et al. (2019b) extend the analysis regarding this topic in a different direction: first they define a new concept called operational asymptotic stochastic dominance and then for log-normal distributions, in their theorem 3, they provide an “if and only if” condition for operational afsd of one distribution over the other. 2 equation (3) provides the intersection point of two cumulative normal distributions in terms of the standardized normal variable z. however, as we are interested in the intersection point in terms of the normal nonstandardized variable, x0 ,we have for t  1 the following relation: z0  (μf − μg ) (σg −σf)→x0  (μfσg − μgσf) σg − σf , which clarifies the relation between equations (1) and (3). yet, only equation (1) is relevant for the analysis given in my original paper. references huang rj, tzeng ly, wang jy, zhao l (2019) comment on “aging population, retirement, and risk taking.” management sci, epub ahead of print august 29, https://doi.org/10.1287/ mnsc.2018.3052. huang rj, tzeng ly, wang jy, zhao l (2020) operational asymptotic stochastic dominance. eur. j. oper. res. 280(1):312–322. levy h (2016a) aging population, retirement, and risk taking. management sci. 62(5):1415–1430. levy h (2016b) stochastic dominance: investment decision making under uncertainty, 3rd ed. (springer, new york). levy m (2019) stocks for the long-run and constant relative risk aversion preferences. eur. j. oper. res. 277(3):1163–1168. markowitz hm, reid dw, tew bv (1994) the value of a blank check. j. portfolio management 20(4):82–91. mehra r, prescott ec (1985) the equity premium: a puzzle. j. monetary econom. 15(2):145–161. levy: aging population and risk taking management science, 2020, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2796–2799, © 2020 informs 2799 copyright 2020, by informs, all rights reserved. copyright of management science is the property of informs: institute for operations research and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. however, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
