nuclear instruments and methods in physics research a 1063 (2024) 169303 available online 31 march 2024 0168-9002/© 2024 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved. dark matter event in nuclear emulsions ii: ionic relaxation and recombination tadaaki tani a,*, takashi asada b, takayuki uchida c, tatsuhiro naka d,e a soc. photogr. imaging jpn., 2933-2, yoshidajima, kaisei-machi, ashigarakami-gun, kanagawa, 258-0021, japan b department of physics, university of naples fererico ii, complesso universitario di monte sant’angelo-via cinthia, 21, 80126, napoli, italy c graduate school of engineering, tokyo polytechnic university, 1583, atsugi, kanagawa, 243-0297, japan d department of physics, faculty of science, toho university, miyama, funabashi, 274-8501, japan e kobayashi-masukawa institute, nagoya university, chikusa, nagoya, 464-8602, japan a r t i c l e i n f o keywords: dark matter nuclear emulsion silver halide grain recombination ionic relaxation a b s t r a c t the previous paper has indicated that it is important to depress both direct recombination and reverse reaction between ionic relaxation products, i.e., latent image centers (agn) and br2 for dark matter (dm) detection by a super-fine-grained nuclear emulsion named nit. this paper describes the results of the analyses on the reverse reaction in the nit containing a typical halogen acceptor na2so3 (ss), which is used to make the nit sensitive. the electronic structure of the nit layer containing ss as measured by means of photo-electron yield spectroscopy in air revealed that ag(so3)23􀀀 was formed in emulsions and could become to be ag(so3)22􀀀 by giving an electron to br2. although ss could not stop the reverse reaction, ss made it so slow that ss could make the nit with ss available for dm detection when the irradiated nit layers were kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦c to 􀀀 50 ◦c) in order to bring about further slowdown of the reaction rate. it is thought that ag(so3)22􀀀 took a place of br2 for the reverse reaction and decreased its rate, since the diffusion of ag(so3)22􀀀 , which is electrically charged and large in size, is slower than that of br2 owing to attractive interaction between ag(so3)22􀀀 and many ionized substituents in gelatin. discussions are made on ideas to depress further the reverse reaction. 1. introduction dark matter (dm) is one of the most interesting and important subjects to be solved in cosmology and astronomy, and has not yet been determined until now. it is widely assumed that undefined elementary particles (e.g., weakly interacting massive particles or wimps) are the constituents of dm. we are advancing plans to detect the wimps using experimental methods, and aim to detect the recoil of nucleus caused by wimps coming against the direction of our solar system within the milky way under a low-background environment. a variety of experiments have been developed over recent decades, aiming to detect these particles via their elastic interaction in a detector medium [1]. a possible detector to distinguish such recoil events from other radiation background events is a track detector with directional sensitivity. as such a detector, we utilize a solid-state track detector named nano image tracker (nit), a dedicated nuclear emulsion with a spatial resolution better than a few hundred nanometers [2,3]. the nit was developed by forming agbr0.96i0.04 grains (denoted agbri grains in this paper) with about 40 nm and 70 nm in equivalent spherical diameter to meet the predicted track length of the nuclear recoils [4]. while this detector has been proven to detect the tracks of slow ions, we are currently focused on understanding this phenomenon from the perspective of photographic science. recently, its applications have expanded beyond its original purpose of dark matter detection, e.g., neutron measurement [5] and quantum diffraction imaging [6], owing to its high special resolution. this diversification of use underscores the growing importance of fundamentally understanding the detector. the fundamental knowledge of photographic processes is briefly summarized below [7]. silver halide (agx) grains in the photographic emulsion layer undergo electron-hole pair creation due to photoexcitation or ionization. an electron is captured by a site with electric charge of +1/2 such as a silver ion at a kink site on the grain surface (electronic process). then, the captured electron attracts and reacts with an interstitial silver ion to form a silver atom on the site (ionic process). a latent image center is composed of a silver cluster and is formed by the alternate repetition of electronic and ionic processes at the same site * corresponding author. e-mail address: tadaakitani@mbr.nifty.com (t. tani). contents lists available at sciencedirect nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nima https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2024.169303 received 18 august 2023; received in revised form 21 february 2024; accepted 30 march 2024 nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 2 with electric charge of +1/2 after changing its charge between 􀀀 1/2 and + 1/2. among agx grains, only the grain with one or more latent image centers on its surface contribute to the formation of a silver grain. it has been estimated that the smallest latent image center is composed of 4–5 silver atoms in such emulsions as the nit, which are not gold-sensitized [7]. latent image formation is counteracted by recombination processes between electrons and positive holes. in the previous paper, we have characterized the dm event in the nit, and revealed that three kinds of recombination processes are taking place as illustrated in fig. 1 [3]. one of them is the direct recombination between free electrons and free positive holes, which takes place in the time range from about 100 fs to about 20 ns. electrons and positive holes, which have escaped from the direct recombination, are captured by electron traps and positive hole traps, respectively, and facing with indirect recombination of trapped electrons with free positive holes and that of trapped positive holes with free electrons [8], respectively. however, ionic conductivity is overwhelmingly larger than electronic one in agx grains in a dark environment, resulting in the occurrence of ionic relaxation processes in prior to indirect recombination ones [7]. thus, most trapped electrons react with interstitial silver ions to form agn, while most trapped positive holes react with silver ion vacancies to form br2. it is noted that br2 molecules are deactivated by gelatin when gelatin is present in abundance. the other recombination process is the reverse reaction between latent image centers agn and irradiation-created br2, and essentially important for dm detection by the nit, as described below. the essential property of the nit for dm detection in terms of the above-stated reverse reaction could be made clear by comparing the characteristics among the four typical emulsions with agbri grains as sensors. they are emulsions for dm detection, minimum ionizing particle (mip) detection (e.g., for opera experiment), radiation therapy [9], and picture-taking. table 1 shows the results of the collection and analysis of the knowledge on the characteristics of the above-stated four emulsions. as shown in this table, the amount of irradiation-created br2 with respect to the amount of gelatin in the nit for dm detection is estimated to be extremely large among them, indicating the concern that the latent image formation in the nit should tend to seriously suffer from the reverse reaction between latent image centers and br2 from the viewpoint of the fact that the ability of gelatin to deactivate br2 is limited. this problem comes from the following reasons. in order to meet predicted track length of a nuclear recoil of a wimp, the nit were designed to make agbri grains the smallest and most abundant in number among the four agbri systems. while each grain creates photoelectrons in it to form a latent image center composed of agn, the same number of positive holes are created in it to form br2 molecules. since the grain concentration in the nit is the highest among the four emulsion layers, the concentration of irradiation-created br2 associated with latent image formation is the highest in the nit. in addition, the number of electron-hole pairs per grain created by a nuclear recoil of a wimp is estimated to be much larger than those created by irradiation in the emulsions for mip detection and picturetaking. it was estimated that the smallest latent image center was composed of ag4 or ag5 and ag2au in s-sensitized and s + au-sensitized emulsions, respectively [7]. it was also evaluated that about 10 electron-hole pairs per grain were needed to form a latent image center on an agbri grain in a fully s + au-sensitized emulsion for picture-taking [7], and about 30 electron-hole pairs in an s + au-sensitized agbri grain with about 200 nm in diameter in an opera emulsion, in which a neutrino-induced high energy particle (i.e., mip) forms 15–30 electron-hole pairs per grain. it is noted that the number of electron-hole pairs per grain created by photoexcitation for picture-taking and that by ionization for the opera experiment are comparable to those needed for latent image formation in the corresponding emulsions to give optimized results. on the other hand, it is predicted that the number of electron-hole pairs in an agbri grain with about 70 nm in diameter created by a nuclear recoil of the wimp in the nit is as many as 1800, being much larger than that needed for the formation of a latent image center on each grain in s + au-sensitized emulsions. however, positive holes with the same large number are at the same time formed in the grain, and should be deactivated to keep latent image centers from being attacked by br2, which are formed by irradiation-created positive holes. it is known that br2 could be deactivated by gelatin with methionine residues as active sites [10] in emulsions for picture-taking. however, it is concerned that gelatin can’t deactivate br2 well in the case of dm detection, since the ratio of the amount of irradiation-created br2 with respect to that of gelatin in the nit layer is extremely large, and the population of methionine residues in gelatin is as small as 0.4 % [11]. it is therefore considered from the above-stated analyses that the most important subject for the latent image formation in the nit for dm detection is, not the depression of the indirect recombination process (2 in fig. 1) by s + au sensitization centers, which is the most important in highly sensitive emulsions for picture-taking and in the opera emulsion for mip detection, but the depression of the reverse reaction process between latent image centers (agn) and irradiation-created br2 (3 in fig. 1). as summarized in table 1, agn in usual photographic films could survive against the reverse reaction owing to the deactivation of br2 by abundant gelatin with methionine residues as active sites. in nuclear emulsions, gelatin cannot protect agn sufficiently against the reverse reaction owing to the fact that the volume fraction of gelatin in nuclear emulsions is much smaller than that in usual photographic emulsions. the reverse reaction between latent image centers and br2 was observed [12] and analyzed in nuclear emulsions for cosmic ray imaging [13]. in addition, the amount of irradiation-created br2 with respect to the amount of gelatin is the largest in the nit for dm detection. in order to overcome this problem, sodium sulfite (ss), which is regarded as a typical halogen acceptor (i.e., a compound with ability to deactivate a halogen molecule) in agx photography, is added to the nit to enhance their sensitivity to nuclear recoils of the wimps instead of using sulfur-plus-gold (s + au) sensitization. however, the performance of ss in the nit has not been analyzed until now. thus, we have focused our study on the effect of ss on the reverse reaction between agn and br2 to make clear its performance in the nit. in order to study the reaction between agn and br2 in the nit in the presence of ss, it is necessary to know their electronic structure composed of the electronic energy levels of agbri grains, agn, br2, ss, complex ions of ss with ag+ in gelatin phase, and the organic layers, which are deposited on the surfaces of samples from air containing various gases and floating organic substances as described later. in this paper, we have prepared multiple nit samples and measured the fig. 1. three kinds of recombination processes taking place in agbri grains [1; direct recombination process between free electrons and free positive holes, 2 and 2’; indirect recombination processes between trapped electrons and free positive holes and between trapped positive holes and free electrons, respectively, 3; reverse reaction between agn and br2 formed through ionic relaxation processes], where ● and ○ are an electron and a positive hole, respectively, cb and vb are conduction and valence bands, respectively, and ag⚪+ and ag◻- are an interstitial silver ion and a silver ion vacancy, respectively. t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 3 electronic energy levels of these materials by means of an apparatus of photo-electron yield spectroscopy in air (pysa). it involves illuminating the sample with ultraviolet light in air and measuring the relationship between the energy of the photons and the photoelectron yield, determining the electronic energy levels of substances in the sample. hence, understanding the reverse reaction, it has been revealed that the reaction process of irradiation-created agn and br2, is crucial for controlling the nit’s performance. 2. samples and experiments the samples, which were subjected to the pysa measurement, were nit layers with or without ss, dried layers of gelatin solutions, to which ss and/or agno3 solutions were added, thin layers of ag, and ag nanoparticles. the nit layer contained agbri grains (about 70 nm in equivalent spherical diameter) [4] as sensors. the grains occupied 35% in volume of the dried emulsion layer. ss was introduced into the emulsion layer by adding its aqueous solution to the nit emulsion before coating (pre-mix method) or by dipping the nit layer in an aqueous solution of ss (dip method). by use of the above-stated samples, the pysa was used to measure the electronic energy levels of agbri and ss in the nit, those of ss and agno3 in gelatin layers, and those of silver particles with varied size. in order to get fundamental aspects of the reverse processes, the nit layers with and without ss were irradiated by αrays and γ rays of 241am source. c ion beams have been considered to use for the simulation of dm detection experiments since c ions are expected to be the most abundant among probable nuclear recoils of wimps in the nit layers composed of elements such as ag, br, i, h, n, and o ions. however, it was difficult to use c ion beams for the purpose of this study owing to the fact that the penetration depth of c ion beams in emulsion layers was estimated to be too short to get accurate experimental results. therefore, in this experiment, alpha rays that generate a similar number of electron-hole pairs per grain were used as a substitute for c ion beam, and also as a target for comparison with gamma rays to get the dependence of the reverse reaction on the number of electron-hole pairs per grain. the number of electron-hole pairs created by irradiation in an agbri grain with 70 nm in diameter was estimated to be 1000–2000 for a nuclear recoil induced by wimps and α-rays, and 100–200 for γray on the basis of the fact that an electron-hole pair was formed by the deposited energy of 5.8 ev in agbr [14]. the nit were irradiated and kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦c ~ -50 ◦c) in air before development for the simulation of the dm detection experiment, and were subjected to their storage under conditions with varied temperature and time period before they were subjected to development for the observation of the change in the amount of latent image centers during the storage. photographic development process was made at 5 ◦c for 10 min by use of maa developer [4]. the readout of developed ag grains was made under an epi-illuminate optical microscope by observing scattered light of the localized surface plasmon resonance in each grain. the decay of latent image centers, which were formed by the irradiation of αand γrays to emulsion layers at room temperature (15 ◦c), was given by the ratio of the number of latent image centers observed just after the irradiation to that observed after the irradiated layer was kept for a time period t under a certain condition, and was called relative sensitivity in this paper. while the relative number of latent image centers created by α rays was given by the average brightness of the scattered light from developed ag grains in nuclear tracks, the number of latent image centers created by γ rays was given by the number of light spots scattered from developed ag grains in the layer. the electronic energy levels of various materials in the nit were measured by means of pysa [15] with an apparatus (riken keiki, ac-2), which can detect electrons with binding energy of less than 6 ev. photo-electrons were observed weakly from gelatin layers in the energy range with slightly less than 6 ev in binding energy, and were attributed to the organic layers deposited from air on their surfaces [16]. it is known that organic substances are always floating in air and are being deposited on sample surfaces as was revealed by observing the fermi levels of thin metal layers, which were changing in air with time after their preparation [16]. the deposited organic layers influence the physical properties of samples and in particular change the fermi levels of metals through the pinning of their fermi levels [16] and the push-back effect [17]. as the evidence for the deposition of organic substances from air on sample surfaces, the photoelectron emission from c 1s orbitals is always observed in the x-ray photoelectron spectra of the samples, which do not contain carbon atoms [18]. the electronic energy level of the valence band maximum at the surfaces of agbri grains in the nit layer was given by the observed threshold energy of the pysa spectra of the grains in the layer [19]. as reference experiments, gelatin layers, to which aqueous solutions of ss and/or agno3 were added before coating, were subjected to pysa measurements. the electronic energy levels of latent image centers composed of agn were evaluated by measuring and analyzing pysa spectra of thin layers of ag, which were vacuum-deposited on glass plates, and became to be isolated nanoparticles when the average thickness of evaporated ag layers was less than 10 nm [20]. when the electronic energy difference between fermi level and the vacuum level is f, the ionization energy (i) and electron affinity (ea) of metal nanoparticles with diameter of d are f + e, and f – e, respectively, where e is a function of 1/d [21,22]. since latent image centers are composed of very small ag clusters, their electronic structures should differ from those of ag in bulk. then, a study has been made on the size-dependent electronic energy levels of ag nanoparticles deposited on glass plates by means of the pysa apparatus. the influence of air on the electronic energy levels of materials concerned was judged by the fermi level of the organic layers deposited on them. the fermi levels of the organic layers were evaluated by observing the equalization of fermi levels of the organic layers with such metal layers as ag, au, and pt, whose fermi levels in vacuum are well known and are so diversified as 􀀀 4.3 ev, 􀀀 5.1 ev, and 􀀀 5.65 ev, respectively [17]. 3. results and discussions 3.1. electronic energy levels of materials in agbri emulsion layers in order to analyze the reverse reaction between latent image centers table 1 characterization of typical detectors with agbri grains as sensors. purpose dm detection mip detection rad. therapy taking picture excitation source heavy particle (low velocity) mip heavy particle (high velocity) visible light size of grains (track length) ~70 nm (<1 μm) ~200 nm (<1 mm) ~200 nm ~1000 nm no. of chem. sens. centers ~30/grain ~300/grain ~300/grain ~7500/grain no. of e-h+pairs (irrad. time) 1000-2000 /grain (100 fs) ~30/grain (1 fs) >5000/grain ≧10/grain (1 ms) volume ratio of gelatin 65% 45–70% ~70% 80–90% no. of br2/cm3 ~5╳1018 0.5–4╳1015 5╳1017~ 2-5╳1012~ ways for sensitization dense traps br2 depression au + s sensitization au + s sensitization au + s sensitization t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 4 and irradiation-created br2 molecules taking place in the nit for dm detection, it is necessary to get the knowledge of the electronic energy levels of the materials in relation to this phenomenon. they are agbr grain, br2 on the grain surface, silver cluster and silver in bulk state, organic layer deposited from air, and ag(so3)23􀀀 , which is formed in the emulsion owing to the reaction between ag+ and so3􀀀 . in the subsequent paragraphs of this subsection, we explain how we determined their electronic energy levels. the electronic energy levels of materials in the nit, which have been made through the experiments described later, are shown in fig. 2. since gelatin is used as a binder for the nit, it is considered that the electronic energy levels of materials in a gelatin layer are the same as those in the nit layer. the threshold energy of the pysa spectra of agbri grains in nuclear emulsions indicated that the energy difference between the top of the valence band of the grains and the vacuum level was about 5.6 ev [19]. it is therefore considered that the electron affinity (ea) of br2 on the grain surface is about 5.6 ev, since br2 is formed by the ionic relaxation of positive holes trapped on the grain surface. organic layers deposited from air on samples are characterized below. it is known that organic materials together with various gases in air are deposited on the surfaces of samples to form organic layers [16]. it is considered that samples are oxidized when the fermi level of the samples is higher than that of the deposited organic layers from air, causing the electron transfer for the fermi level equalization between them. thus, the fermi level of the deposited organic layers from air was estimated by measuring the electronic structures of the interfaces between the organic layers and various metals, whose fermi levels in vacuum were well known. while the fermi levels of clean ag, au, and pt in vacuum were largely diversified to be 􀀀 4.3 ev, 􀀀 5.1 ev, and 􀀀 5.65 ev, respectively [17], the observed fermi levels of their thin layers deposited on glass plates were nearly the same (􀀀 4.71 ev, 􀀀 4.73 ev, and 􀀀 4.76 ev, respectively) in air [16,23], and indicated that the fermi level of the deposited organic layers from air on the their surfaces pinned the fermi levels of thin layers of these metals, and was estimated to be the average of the observed fermi levels of the thin layers of these metals, i. e., 􀀀 4.73 ev. it is noted that the actually observed fermi levels of thin metal layers were fluctuated as seen later in this study, since it takes such a long time as more than several weeks to achieve the fermi level equalization between the deposited organic layer from air and the thin layers of metals [16]. the electronic energy levels of ag nanoparticles are evaluated below. when the average thickness of ag was equal to or more than 10 nm, deposited ag atoms formed continuous layers. since the continuous layers exhibited their ionization energy of 4.58 ev on the average without dependence on their thickness, they were attributed to ag in bulk in air. when their average thickness was less than 10 nm, deposited ag atoms formed isolated ag nanoparticles, their ionization energy increasing with decrease in the average thickness of deposited ag layers. the observed ionization energies of isolated ag nanoparticles in deposited ag layers with average thickness of 0.3 nm, 1.0 nm, and 3.0 nm were 4.85 ev, 4.67 ev, and 4.63 ev, respectively, their deviation from that of bulk ag being 0.26 ev, 0.09 ev, and 0.05 ev, respectively. according to kubo, the deviation is the electric energy of a positive charge in a nanoparticle with diameter of d after its ionization, and is given by e2/d [24,25]. then, the equivalent spherical diameter of isolated nanoparticles in deposited ag layers with average thickness of 0.3 nm, 1.0 nm, and 3.0 nm were estimated to be 5.5 nm, 16 nm, and 36 nm, respectively. the stability of latent image centers against oxidation has been discussed below on the basis of the electronic energy levels of materials in the nit layers. it was estimated that the smallest latent image centers in emulsions, which were free from gold sensitization, were composed of 4–5 ag atoms [7]. since the ionization energy of ag nanoparticles was estimated to be 4.85 ev when their diameter was 5.5 nm, exhibiting the tendency to increase with decreasing their size, the ionization energy of latent image centers should be larger than this value. furthermore, positively charged oxidants including a positive hole cannot attack a latent image center with electric charge of +1/2 owing to the repulsive force between them [7]. since the fermi level of the organic layers was evaluated to be 􀀀 4.71 ev, it is difficult for o2 and other oxidizing gases in air to oxidize latent image centers so rapidly and significantly as to meet the decay of the centers, which is studied later in this paper. the formation and characterization of ag(so3)23􀀀 have been initiated by the pysa measurement of the nit layers. fig. 3 shows the pysa spectra of the nit layers with and without ss. the observed onset of photo-electron yield in the lower energy region with about 4.5 ev could be attributed to the photo-electron emission from ag clusters, which were photolytically formed before and during the pysa measurement, since its threshold energy was close to that of ag nanoparticles as seen in fig. 2, and in addition, similar photo-electron emission was observed before [13]. the photoelectrons in the higher energy region with about 5.6 ev as its threshold in the spectrum of the layer in the absence of ss could be attributed to those from agbri grains, since similar pysa spectra were already observed for emulsion layers with agbri grains in the nit as shown in fig. 2 [19]. however, the observed onset of photoelectron yield in the higher energy region with 5.4–5.5 ev as its threshold in the spectrum of the layer in the presence of ss could not be attributed to those from agbri grains, but to those from the species created by the addition of ss to the layer, since the addition of ss to the layer increased the yield and shifted the threshold energy of the photoelectron emission. then, as shown in fig. 4, the pysa measurement has been extended to gelatin layers, to which aqueous solutions of ss and agno3 were added before their coating. since neither photo-electron yield from a gelatin layer with ss nor that from a gelatin layer with agno3 was larger than that from a gelatin layer itself, it was judged that neither ss nor agno3 in a gelatin layer had electrons with binding energy of less than fig. 2. the electronic energy levels of materials in the nit as measured by the pysa apparatus used in this study, where a closed circle and vb are an electron and valence band, respectively. the highest occupied electronic energy level of ss was situated below 􀀀 6 ev and could not be indicated in this figure. fig. 3. pysa spectra of the nit without (a, ○) and with ss (b, ●). t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 5 6 ev. on the other hand, strong photo-electron emission was observed with threshold at 5.4–5.5 ev from gelatin layers, to which both ss and agno3 were added. it is known that so32􀀀 ions and ag+ ions form soluble complex ions of ag(so3)23􀀀 in aqueous solutions, and dissolve silver halide grains by forming ag(so3)2 3 􀀀 with ag+ ions on the grain surface [26]. it is therefore considered that the observed photo-electrons with threshold energy of 5.4–5.5 ev in fig. 4 were emitted from ag(so3)23􀀀 in gelatin layers. as shown in fig. 5, the photo-electron yield at the energy of 6 ev increased with increase in the amount of agno3 added, supporting the idea that the photo-electrons were emitted from ag(so3)23􀀀 in gelatin layers. the deviation from the proportionality indicates that ag+ ions tended to be captured by methionine residues in gelatin chains [10] in prior to form complex ions with so32􀀀 ions when the added amount of ag+ was small, and that ag+ ions tended to form ag(so3)- instead of ag(so3)23􀀀 when the amount of ag+ ions was large. it is considered that the photo-electrons as observed above were emitted from ag⁺ in ag(so₃)₂3‾ according to the following reasons. first of all, an so₃2‾ ion had not any electron with binding energy of less than 6 ev and is furthermore in contact with a positively charged ion in ag (so₃)₂3‾. secondly, it was observed that the binding energy of an electron in ag⁺ could be so small as to capture a positive hole in agcl at low temperature by forming a self-trapped positive hole with ag2⁺, which was closely surrounded by 6 cl‾ in agcl [7]. it is therefore considered that the association of 2 so₃2‾anions to ag+ brought about the photo-electron emission with threshold at 5.4–5.5 ev from ag+ in a ag (so3)23􀀀 complex ion in a gelatin layer. thus, the pysa spectrum of ag(so3)23􀀀 made it possible to consider its influence on the interaction between br2 and agn in the nit. while each spectrum in fig. 3 was expressed by plotting the square root of photo-electron yield as a function of photon energy, the intersection between the straight line and the background line in the spectrum of ag (so3)23􀀀 gave 5.7 ev as its vertical ionization energy in the potential energy profile (fig. 6). however, instead of vertical ionization energy, adiabatic ionization energy of ag(so3)23􀀀 complex ions is important for the consideration of the electron exchange of the complex ions with their surroundings, and could be given as 5.4–5.5 ev by the energy, at which photo-electrons just begun to appear in their spectrum as illustrated in fig. 6. these results are drawn in fig. 2. as seen in this figure, an ag (so3)23􀀀 ion could give an electron to br2 on the grain surface to become an ag(so3)22􀀀 when they encountered with each other there. since the electron affinity of an ag(so3)22􀀀 ion is larger than the ionization energy of a latent image center agn, it was probable for the former to oxidize the latter after the former migrate in gelatin phase and encounter with the latter in the presence of a plenty of br􀀀 as follows; agn + ag(so3)2 2 􀀀 + br􀀀 → agn-1 + ag(so3)23􀀀 + agbr. furthermore, it is noted that an so₃2‾ ion itself does not have an ability to reduce a br2 molecule fig. 4. pysa spectra of gelatin layers without ss(a), with ss (b, c, d, and f), and with agno3 (b, c, d, and e). in the small table in this figure, the column of ss indicates the fraction of ss in weight % with respect to gelatin, and that of ag indicates the fraction of agno3 in weight % with respect to gelatin. fig. 5. yield of photo-electrons emitted from ag(so3)23􀀀 by excitation light of 6 ev as a function of added amount of agno3 in gelatin layers, to which ss (2 wt %) was added. white circles in this figure correspond to the photo-electron yield values in the curves of f, b, c, and d, respectively, at the energy of excitation light of 6.0 ev. fig. 6. potential energy profiles of ag(so3)23􀀀 at its ground state and ionized state. solid and broken arrows respectively indicate the electronic transitions for vertical ionization and adiabatic one. t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 6 according to the electronic energy diagram in fig. 2, and that it does not eliminate br₂ irreversibly although it is usually called a halogen acceptor in the field of photographic science. 3.2. observation of decay of latent image centers in the nit layers we aim to record as many dm events as possible within the detector in terms of the event search. it means a dm exposure period should be as long as possible. the experimental period shall be around several months. however, if the created latent image centers are decomposed due to the recombination, the experimental period shall be limited due to the decay constant of the latent image center. therefore, we investigated how the created latent image centers decay depending on the presence of ss and temperature. fig. 7 shows the comparison in observed sensitivity between the nit layers, to which ss was introduced by the pre-mix method and by the dip method. the vertical and horizontal axes of the figure correspond to the quantities related to the sensitivity to alpha rays and gamma rays, respectively. these were quantified using image analysis of scattered light observed with an optical microscope in the emulsion layer after the development. the observed values of sensitivity by the pre-mix method seem to be bit higher with smaller fluctuation than those by the dip method. since so32􀀀 ions tend to dissolve agbri grains by forming ag (so3)23􀀀 ions with ag+ ions on the grain surface, it is considered that the dip method causes the ostwald ripening and dissolution of the grains more strongly than the pre-mix method, enhancing the sensitivity decrease and fluctuation. the observations and analyses of the decay of latent image centers in the nit layers under various conditions were made by the pre-mix method and described below. fig. 8 shows the decay of latent image centers in the nit layers without ss, which were formed by α ray and γ ray irradiation and kept at different temperature in air. as seen in this figure, the number of latent image centers formed by γrays decreased up to about 1/5 after the emulsion layers were kept for more than 30 days. the results shown in fig. 8 indicates that 1/5 latent image centers could survive and that gelatin could protect about 1/5 of total latent image centers against the reverse reaction in the nit layers. however, the decay rate of latent image centers depended on experimental conditions. fig. 8 shows that the decay rate of the latent image centers in the absence of ss formed by α rays was smaller than that of the centers formed by γ rays. since it is predicted that α and γ rays create about 1000–2000 and 100–200 electron-hole pairs per grain, respectively, it is considered that the number of ag atoms in each latent image center formed by α ray irradiation is larger by about 10 times than that in each center formed by γray irradiation. a latent image center agn loses its activity when it becomes to be ag3 after the repetition of its reverse reaction with br2. it is therefore considered that the decay rate of latent image centers decreases with increase in the size of the centers. this consideration is in accord with the above observation that the decay rate of latent image centers formed by γ ray irradiation was larger by about 7 times than that of the centers formed by αray irradiation. the reverse reaction studied here is the essential process for solarization with similar temperature dependence [27]. as seen in fig. 8, the decay rate at low temperature was smaller than that at high temperature, and the observed values of the half-life (t1/2) of latent image centers formed by γ rays at 16 ◦c (289 k) and 􀀀 15 ◦c (258 k), were 3.8 days and 38 days, respectively. the rate constant of the decay of latent image centers is reciprocally proportional to t1/2, and is given by aexp(-ea/rt), where a, ea, r, and t are constant, activation energy, gas constant, and absolute temperature. the value of ea was given to be 4.8 kcal/mol by applying the above-stated experimental result to the equation, and was attributed to the activation energy of the diffusion of br2 in gelatin phase. fig. 9 shows the decay of latent image centers in the nit layers without and with ss when the centers were formed by α ray andγ ray irradiations and kept at different temperatures in air. as seen in this figure, the decay of the centers formed by γ ray irradiation was faster than that of the centers formed by αray irradiation, confirming that the size of latent image centers formed by γ ray irradiation was smaller than that of the centers formed by α ray irradiation. in both cases, it was also confirmed that the lowering of the storage temperature to keep irradiated emulsion layers before development could significantly decrease the decay rate of the centers, and was therefore useful to improve the performance of the nit. in every case, it was found that the addition of ss to emulsion layers could decrease the decay rate of latent image centers, and should be therefore expected to improve the performance of the nit. by taking into account the fact that, in addition to ss, gelatin is also a halogen acceptor, the mechanisms of the effects of ss and gelatin on the reverse reaction are discussed below. as observed in the former paper [13], the reverse reaction of irradiation-created br2 with latent image centers in dried emulsion layers having agbri grains, in which gelatin was immobile, could be irreversibly depressed by gelatin, unless the volume ratio of gelatin in emulsion layers was reduced to excess. according to berg and keller [28], most latent image centers on agbr grains were destroyed by irradiation-created br2 even in the presence of gelatin in hydrosol of agbr grains, where gelatin was mobile, although the rate of the destruction could be significantly reduced by gelatin. it is known that a methionine residue in a gelatin chain acting as lewis base reacts with br2 acting as a lewis acid to form a halogen bond. however, the halogen bond formation is reversible, and a br2 molecule, which is involved in the halogen bond, still keeps its ability to react with an agn to form 2agbr. according to the electronic energy levels of components in the nit as seen in fig. 2, the electron affinity of br2 on agbri grains is slightly larger than the ionization energy of ag(so3)23􀀀 .. it is therefore considered that the electron transfer from ag(so3)23􀀀 . to br2 takes place to form ag (so3)22􀀀 , which can move in gelatin phase and arrive at a latent image center agn to oxidize it. since the reaction of br2 with agn was faster than that of ag(so3)22􀀀 with agn, it is considered that the mobility of ag (so3)22􀀀 in gelatin phase was smaller than that of br2. emulsion layers are composed of agbri grains suspended in gelatin with loose network of its chains, through which small molecules and ions can migrate [29]. gelatin chains are composed of various kinds of amino acid residues, many of which are dissociated to have electric charges and thus reduces the mobility of ionic species owing to attractive interaction between them. it is known that non-ionized species diffuse more rapidly than the fig. 7. comparison in sensitivity between the nit layers, to which ss was introduced by pre-mix method and by the dip method. t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 7 ionized species of similar size in gelatin layers [30]. it is considered from this viewpoint that the mobility of br2 in gelatin phase should be larger than that of ag(so3)22􀀀 , since br2 is non-ionized, and smaller than an ag (so3)22􀀀 ion. among amino acid residues in gelatin, only methionine residue is a soft lewis base and capable of reducing the mobility of such a lewis acid as br2 by forming a halogen bond between them. however, the occupancy of methionine residues in gelatin is only 0.4% [11]. it is therefore considered that an ag(so3)2 2 􀀀 ion has smaller mobility with larger activation energy for its diffusion than a br2 molecule, and could thus make the time for the reverse reaction so long as stated above. in addition, nuclear recoils of the wimp are predicted to create as many as 1000–2000 electron-hole pairs, and should therefore form large latent image centers with slow decay rate. thus, it is considered from the above-stated results and analyses that the rate of the reverse reaction between agn and br2 could be reduced to make the nit layers available for dm detection when they would contain sufficient amount of ss and were kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦c ~ 􀀀 50 ◦c) before development. it is however probable that the reverse reaction would appear to destroy agn under some unexpected conditions. while the reaction between methionine residue and br2 is reversible, methionine residue in gelatin chain can immobilize br2 in emulsion layers with large volume fraction of gelatin, since br2 bound by such a long chain as gelatin is hardly mobile in the layers. however, many irradiation-created br2 molecules can mobile and arrive at agn in emulsion layers when the volume fraction of gelatin in emulsion layers is so small that the concentration of methionine residues in gelatin phase is not enough to capture most br2 molecules or when the concentration of irradiation-created br2 is so large that many br2 molecules can escape from methionine residues in gelatin phase. 3.3. depression of reverse reaction between agn and br2 it has been found from the above-stated examination that the reverse reaction between agn and irradiation-created br2 is especially severe in the nit and has not been fully overcome at the present. then, considerations are made on ideas to cause further depression of the reverse reaction between agn and br2 according to the knowledge obtained in this study and reported in literature [7,13,31,32]. the methods to irreversibly remove br2 on the surface of agbri grains in emulsion layers include reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and 2-electron sensitization [7,31]. reduction sensitization centers are composed of ag2 at neutral kink sites on the surface of agbri grains, and usually formed by weakly reducing the grains. however, reduction sensitization is not compatible to s + au sensitization, which is usually used for highly sensitive photographic emulsions including nuclear emulsions for the opera experiment, since gold sensitization tends to make ag2 a fog center [7]. fortunately, the nit are free from gold sensitization, and therefore afford reduction sensitization. hydrogen hypersensitization is carried out by keeping emulsion layers in hydrogen gas after evacuation for weak reduction of the surface of agbri grains in the layers [32]. although hydrogen hypersensitization is compatible to fig. 8. the degree of the decay of latent image centers in the nit layers without ss, both of which were irradiated by α rays (left-hand side) and by γ rays (right-hand side), and kept in air for time period described on the abscissa at temperature indicated in the figures. fig. 9. the decay of latent image centers in the nit layers without and with ss in air at temperature indicated in the figures. the results with latent image centers, which were formed by α ray and γ ray irradiations, were shown by solid and broken lines, respectively. t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 8 s + au sensitization, it forms the centers composed of ag2 at negatively charged kink sites, which are not stable for a long time in air [7]. while the mechanism of 2-electron sensitization is similar to that of reduction sensitization, it has been designed to be compatible to s + au sensitization by replacing ag2 with a special organic compound [31]. neither reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, nor 2-electron sensitization has ever been examined for nuclear emulsions in the past. another way to depress the reverse reaction between agn and irradiation-created br2 is to decrease its rate further. this way should be achieved by decreasing the mobility of such medium species as ag (so3)22􀀀 in gelatin phase and by increasing the size of agn. ways to achieve the former include the lowering of the temperature for keeping irradiated emulsion layers before development, and the increase of the size and electric charges of medium species. ways to achieve the latter, to increase the size of agn include the increase in the number of electronhole pairs per grain by irradiation, and increase in the efficiency of the formation and growth of latent image centers agn. while a way to increase the number of electron-hole pairs per grain is to increase the size of the grains, it is likely to suffer from the reduction in the read-out efficiency of developed grains. ways to increase the efficiency of formation and growth of agn are to depress two kinds of recombination; direct recombination between free electrons and free positive holes and reverse reaction between agn and irradiation-created br2. direct recombination could be depressed by introducing the traps for electrons and positive holes [3,7]. in silver halide grains, traps for electrons and positive holes are usually crystal defects and impurities, respectively [8]. crystal defects includes dislocations and silver ions at kink sites on the grain surfaces. impurities includes iodide ions in agbri grains, and is expected to be improved by increasing the concentration of iodide ions or by localizing them within the core portion of the grains. effective ways to depress the reverse reaction between agn and br2 are such irreversible treatments as reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and 2-electron sensitization, as stated above. 4. summary following the previous study [3], which characterized dm event in super-fine-grained nuclear emulsions by direct recombination and reverse reaction between the products of ionic relaxation (i.e., agn and br2), the present study was made on the latter by placing its focus on the performance of a typical halogen acceptor na2so3 (ss), which is used to enhance the sensitivity of the emulsions and is therefore expected to influence the reverse reaction. by means of pysa, it has been revealed that ag(so3)23􀀀 took a place of br2 for the reverse reaction by giving an electron to br2 and remarkably reduce the rate of the reverse reaction, although na2so3 by itself could not irreversibly remove the reverse reaction. discussions have been made on ideas to cause further depression and irreversible removal of the reverse reaction, including reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and 2-electron sensitization. credit authorship contribution statement tadaaki tani: writing – review & editing, writing – original draft, validation, supervision, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, data curation, conceptualization. takashi asada: writing – review & editing, resources, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, data curation. takayuki uchida: writing – review & editing, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, data curation. tatsuhiro naka: writing – review & editing, validation, supervision, project administration, methodology, investigation, funding acquisition, formal analysis, data curation, conceptualization. declaration of competing interest the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. data availability data will be made available on request. acknowledgement this work was supported by japan society for the promotion of science (jsps) kakenhi grant number jp18h03699 and jp19h05806. references [1] t.m. undagoltla, rauch ludwig, dark matter direct-detection experiments, j. phys. g: nucl. part, phys. 43 (2016) 013001. [2] t. naka, t. asada, t. katsuragawa, k. hakamata, m. yoshimoto, k. kuwabara, m. nakamura, o. sato, t. nakano, y. tawara, g. de lellis, c. sirignano, n. d’ambrossio, fine grained nuclear emulsion for higher resolution tracking detector, nuclear inst, methods in physical research a 718 (2013) 519–521. [3] t. tani, t. naka, dark matter event in nuclear emulsions: comparative analysis by time-resolved photoconductivity of silver halide grains, nucl. instrum. methods phys. res. a 1046 (2023) 167633. [4] t. asada, t. naka, k. kuwabara, m. yoshimoto, the development of a super-finegrained nuclear emulsion, prog. theor. exp. phys. 2017 (2017) 063h01, https:// doi.org/10.1093/ptep/ptx076. [5] t. shiraishi, s. akamatsu, t. naka, t. asada, g. de lellis, v. tioukov, g. rosa, r. kobayashi, n. ambrosio, a. alexandrov, o. sato, environmental sub-mev neutron measurement at the gran sasso surface laboratory with a super-finegrained nuclear emulsion detector, phys. rev. c 107 (2023) 014608. [6] s. sala, a. ariga, a. ereditato, m. giammarchi, m. leone, c. pistillo, p. scampoli, first demonstration of antimatter wave interferometry, sci. adv. 5 (2019) eaav 7610. [7] t. tani, photographic science advances in nanoparticles, j-aggregates, dye sensitization, and organic devices, oxford university press, oxford, 2011. [8] w. schottky, w.t. read jr., statistics of the recombination of holes and electrons, phys. rev. 87 (1952) 835. [9] t. toshito, k. kodama, l. sihver, k. yusa, m. ozaki, k. amako, s. kameoka, k. murakami, t. sasaki, s. aoki, t. ban, t. fukuda, m. komatsu, h. kubota, n. naganawa, t. nakamura, t. nakano, m. natsume, k. niwa, s. takahashi, j. yoshida, h. yoshida, m. nakazawa, n. kanematsu, m. komori, s. sato, m. asai, t. koi, c. fukushima, s. ogawa, m. shibasaki, h. shibuya, measurements of total and partial charge-changing cross sections for 200- to 400-mev/nucleon 12c on water and polycarbonate, phys. rev. c75 (2007) 054606. [10] j.e. maskasky, a comparison of oxidized and nonoxidized gelatins. i. silver ion binding, j. imag. sci. 33 (1989) 10–13. [11] p.i. rose, gelatin i. general properties, in: t.h. james (ed.), the theory of the photographic process, fourth ed., macmillan, new york, 1977, pp. 51–67. [12] akira nishio, kunihiro morishima, ken-ichi kuwabara, tetsuo yoshida, takeshi funakubo, nobuko kitagawa, mitsuaki kuno, yuta manabe, mitsuhiro nakamura, nuclear emulsion with excellent long-term stability developed for cosmic-ray imaging, nucl. instrum. methods phys. res. a 966 (2020) 163850. [13] t. tani, a. nishio, t. uchida, k. morishima, track formation in nuclear plates for cosmic-ray imaging with stabilized ag nanoparticles, nucl. instrum. methods phys. res. a 1006 (2021) 165427. [14] k. alan yamakawa, silver bromide crystal counters, phys. rev. 82 (1951) 522–526. [15] y. nakajima, m. hoshino, d. yamashita, m. uda, near edge structures of mg-, co-, cu-, and zn-tetraphenylporphyrins measured by pesa and calculated with dv-xα, adv. quant. chem. 42 (2003) 399–405. [16] t. tani, r. kan, y. yamano, t. uchida, stabilization of ag nanostructures by tuning their fermi levels, jpn. j. appl. phys. 57 (2018) 055001. [17] h. ishii, k. seki, energy level alignment at organic-metal interfaces, in: w. r. salaneck, k. seki, a. kahn, j.-j. pireaux (eds.), conjugated polymer and molecular interfaces science and technology for photonic and optoelectronic applications, marcel dekker, inc., new york, basel, 2001, pp. 293–349. [18] k. siegbahn, c. nordling, a. fahlman, r. nordberg, k. hamrin, j. hedman, g. johansson, t. bergmark, s.-e. karlsson, i. lindgren, b. lindgren, atomic esca, molecular and solid state structure studied by means of electron spectroscopy, almqvist & wiksells bpktryckeri ab, uppsala, 1967. [19] t. tani, t. uchida, t. naka, analyses and design of nuclear emulsions for dark matter detection, radiat. meas. 129 (2019) 106184. [20] t. tani, y. yamaguchi, t. nishimi, t. uchida, a. kudo, examination of photocatalytic z-scheme for overall water splitting with its electronic structure, phys. chem. chem. phys. 25 (2023) 11418–11428, https://doi.org/10.1039/ d3cp00241a. [21] m. svanqvist, k. hansen, non-jellium scaling of metal cluster ionization energies and electron affinity, eur. phys. j. d 56 (2010) 199–203. [22] k. rademann, b. kaiser, u. uven, f. hensel, size dependence of the gradual transition to metallic properties in isolated mercury clusters, phys. rev. lett. 59 (1987) 2319–2321. t. tani et al. nuclear inst. and methods in physics research, a 1063 (2024) 169303 9 [23] t. tani, t. uchida, studies on electronic structure of interfaces between ag and gelatin for stabilization of ag nanoparticles, j. j. appl. phys. 54 (2015) 065001. [24] r. kubo, j. phys. soc. jpn. 17 (1962) 975–986. [25] r. kubo, ultra-fine particles. editorial board on ultra-fine particles, agne gijutsu center, tokyo, 1984, pp. 4–10 (in japanese). [26] j. pouradier, a. pailliotet, c. r. berry, properties of silver halides i. structure and thermodynamic properties, in: ref.18, pp.1-12. [27] p.j. hillson, e.a. sutherns, latent-image effect involving reversal or desensitization, in: c.e.k. mees, t.h. james (eds.), the theory of the photographic process, third ed., macmillan, new york, 1966 (chapter 8). [28] w.f. berg, h. keller, latent-image fading and the function of gelatin in the silver halide system, photogr. sci. eng. 11 (1967) 178–180. [29] j.e. jolly, photogr, sci. eng. 14 (1970) 169–177. [30] t. h. james, the rate of development i. general kinetics of negative image development, in: ref.18, pp.404-429. [31] i.r. gould, j.r. lenhard, a.a. muenter, s.a. godleski, s. farid, two-electron sensitization: a new concept for silver halide photography, j. am. chem. soc. 122 (2000) 11934–11943. [32] t.a. babcock, m.h. sewell, w.c. lewis, t.h. james, hypersensitization of spectroscopic films and plates using hydrogen gas, vol. 79, 1974, p. 1479. t. tani et al.
