sensors & actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 available online 6 february 2024 0924-4247/© 2024 the author(s). published by elsevier b.v. this is an open access article under the cc by license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). improvement of environmental robustness in non-invasive core body temperature sensor studied numerically and experimentally yuki hashimoto *, soto tada , yoshifumi nishida school of engineering, department of mechanical engineering, tokyo institute of technology, tokyo 152–8552, japan a r t i c l e i n f o keywords: core body temperature wearable sensor heat flux heat-related illnesses a b s t r a c t preventing heat-related illnesses, which are on the rise due to intense heat, constitutes a critical social issue. the monitoring of core body temperature presents an efficient measure, as heat-related illnesses disrupt the balance of thermoregulatory functions. directly measuring core body temperature is typically highly invasive and impractical for use during physical activity. the heat flux method, which represents one of the non-invasive core body temperature estimation methods utilizing a skin-attachable heat flow sensor, has been reported as an appropriate approach for active measurements. one notable practical challenge revolves around the occurrence of significant measurement errors due to fluctuations in ambient air temperature and airflow. here we propose a novel core body temperature sensor grounded in this method, designed to be resilient to variations in the surrounding environment. we substantiate this through both theoretical and experimental verification. utilizing numerical analysis, we investigated the impact of the proposed sensor structure on estimation. our theoretical analysis demonstrates the potential to estimate core body temperature more accurately than is achievable with the conventional method, particularly when the ambient temperature and airflow are variable. furthermore, in line with the outcomes of our numerical analysis, we conducted experimental demonstrations showing the accurate estimation of core body temperature, even under changing airflow conditions. these results strongly validate the efficacy of our proposed new core body temperature sensor, which exhibits resilience to changes in the surrounding environment, both in theory and practice. this outcome is poised to significantly enlarge the potential application scope of non-invasive core body temperature sensors. 1. introduction in recent years, due to the advancement of global warming, the frequency of extreme weather events [1] and natural disasters [2] have increased, threatening our lives. in particular, the control of heat-related illnesses, which are increasing due to intense heat, has become an urgent social issue [3–5]. heat-related illnesses are conditions in which prolonged exposure to a hot, humid environment disrupts the balance of thermoregulatory functions, allowing heat to build up inside the body [6]. since the internal body temperature (core body temperature) rises during the onset of heat-related illnesses, it is recommended to keep the core body temperature below 38 ◦c (38.5 ◦c during heat acclimation) as one of the preventive measures [7,8], and the development of technology to easily measure the core body temperature in daily life with high accuracy is expected [9,10]. in general, measuring core body temperature is highly invasive because a temperature sensor needs to be inserted into the inner body from the body cavity [10]. while this method is largely impractical for use in outdoor settings, gastrointestinal temperature measurements using ingestible thermometer pills have been applied successfully [11–13]. although the period following ingestion of the pills does not influence the validity of the measurements [14], inevitably these pills transit through the gut and the replacement cost imposes an economic burden during long-duration monitoring. measurement of gastrointestinal temperature is not always applicable during daily routines or when regular fluid consumption is recommended operational practice [10,15]. on the other hand, the heat flux method, which is a non-invasive method for estimating core body temperature from heat flow in the vicinity of the skin measured by a skin-attachable sensor, has been reported as a suitable method for measurements during activities [16–21]. fig. 1 shows the schematic illustration of the method. the method estimates core body temperature from the readings of each sensor when the skin is brought into contact with a probe made of insulating material with sensors capable of measuring the temperature of the skin and its opposing side. specifically, assuming that the * corresponding author. e-mail address: hashimoto.y.ai@m.titech.ac.jp (y. hashimoto). contents lists available at sciencedirect sensors and actuators: a. physical journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/sensors-and-actuators-a-physical https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2024.115136 received 24 august 2023; received in revised form 4 january 2024; accepted 4 february 2024 sensors and actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 2 temperature distribution in the vicinity of the probe is steady and one-dimensional, the core body temperature (tbody) is simply estimated using eq. 1 from the temperatures (tskin, tsen) measured by the sensors [16]. tbody = tskin +a(tskin 􀀀 tsen) (1) a = rskin { rsen 􀀀 1 + ( rleak + 2rair + rairrleak rskin )􀀀 1 } (2) where rair, rsen, rskin, and rleak are thermal resistances of the air, the sensor probe, the skin (vertical), and the skin (lateral), respectively. actual measurements are conducted by determining the parameter “a” in eq. 1 by comparing the estimated value with the probe with a reference value of core body temperature such as rectal temperature, esophageal temperature, etc. the parameter “a” in eq. 1 can be described by eq. 2. as the temperature and airflow around the probe change, the thermal resistance of the air (rair) increases or decreases. causing the parameter “a” in eq. 1 to change, resulting in a large estimation error in core body temperature. this is one of the challenges in core body temperature estimation with conventional heat flux methods for practical use. several studies related to the problem have been reported. janke et al. claim that the conventional heat flux method shown in fig. 1 is not affected by ambient temperature fluctuation. however, as mentioned above, this claim is incorrect because some terms in the estimation equation are affected by changes in ambient temperature and airflow shown in eqs. 1 and 2 [22]. welles et al. have reported the clinical data on the accuracy of the conventional heat flux method in changing the ambient temperature under the specific air flow. in the experiment, the effect of ambient temperature and air flow change on the estimation error was not quantitatively analyzed, but it was reported that a relatively large error of about 0.5 ◦c occurred [23]. kitamura et al. mentioned that the ambient temperature and airflow change affect the measurement value of the conventional heat flux method and as a countermeasure, a plan of covering with sponge-like material of low thermal conductivity is proposed, but the concrete verification data are only the verification results when the ambient temperature is changed to 20, 25, 30 ◦c without air flow, and the robustness under the air flow generation has not been verified [18]. from the above, the fundamental solution on air temperature and airflow countermeasure and validation data in the heat flux method have not been sufficiently reported in the conventional study. here, we focus on aforementioned technical issue and propose a new core body temperature sensor based on the heat flux method, which is robust to changes in the surrounding environment, and report the results of both theoretical and experimental verification. 2. materials and methods 2.1. measurement theory the outline of the proposed method is shown in fig. 2. in this method, a material with high thermal conductivity is wrapped around the sensor probe. the method aims to control the horizontal heat flow in the skin under the sensor probe without being affected by changes in ambient temperature and airflow by forcibly redirecting the heat flow between the skin and the outside air to the covering layer. this step addresses one of the error factors in the conventional methods. an equation for estimating the core body temperature taking the above into account is shown in eqs. 3 and 4. rcover and r∗leak describe thermal resistances of the covering layer and skin (lateral). eqs. 3 and 4 are simply expressed as eq. 5, assuming that the thermal conductivity of the cover layer is sufficiently higher than that of other materials and approximating rcover = 0. this equation does not include the thermal resistance of the air (rair), which is dependent on ambient temperature and airflow, unlike the conventional equations (eqs. 1 and 2). in addition, the heat capacity of the skin (cskin) is considered, aiming to compensate for heat flow changes during transient state, a factor that is not considered in the conventional models. in actual measurement, as in the conventional method, it is necessary to compare the measured value of the sensor probe with the reference value in advance to determine the unknown parameters (rskin(r-s1en +rl-e1ak), rskincskin) in eq. 5. tbody = tskin +brskin(tskin 􀀀 tsen)+rskincskin dtskin dt (3) b= 1 rsen + ( 1􀀀 rcover rsen ) • ⎡ ⎢⎢⎣ rcover ⎧⎪⎪⎨ ⎪⎪⎩ ⎛ ⎜⎜⎝ 1+ rcover r∗ leak +2rair + r∗ leakrair rskin ⎞ ⎟⎟⎠ 􀀀 1 • ( 1+ rleak rskin ) +1 ⎫⎪⎪⎬ ⎪⎪⎭ +rleak ⎤ ⎥⎥⎦ 􀀀 1 (4) tbody = tskin +rskin 􀀀 rsen 􀀀 1+rleak 􀀀 1 ) (tskin 􀀀 tsen)+rskincskin dtskin dt (5) 2.2. numerical simulation method for the theoretical examination of the proposed method, the numerical analysis using the finite element method was conducted. the steady-state or transient state of the temperature distribution in the measurement system, comprising the sensor probe, probe cover, biological tissue, and air as outlined in the proposed method, was computed using the following equations as shown in eqs. 6–8 [24,25]. eq. 6 fig. 1. overview of core body temperature measurement by the conventional heat flux method. “t” and “r” in the figure represent the temperature and thermal resistance of each part. fig. 2. overview of core body temperature measurement by the proposed heat flux method. “t”, “r”, and “c” in the figure represent the temperature, thermal resistance, and thermal capacity of each part. y. hashimoto et al. sensors and actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 3 describes the heat conduction equation in each material for obtaining the steady or transient state of the temperature distribution. eqs. 7 and 8 describe momentum conservation equations for obtaining the steady or transient state of the velocity field of the air. the temperature distribution in the presence of airflow in the measurement system is solved by combining these equations. ρcp ∂t ∂t + ρcpu • ∇t +∇ • ( 􀀀 k∇t) = 0 (6) ρ ( ∂u ∂t + u • ∇u ) = 􀀀 ∇p+∇ • [ μ{ ∇u+(∇u) tr } 􀀀 2 3 μ(∇ • u) ] (7) ρ∇ • u = 0 (8) where k, cp, ρ, t, u, μ, p and t represent the thermal conductivity, heat capacity, density, temperature, velocity (fluid only), viscosity (fluid only), pressure (fluid only) and time of the materials, respectively. also, “tr” indicates for the transposed matrix. the finite element analysis software comsol multiphysics® was utilized for the computation. a two-dimensional axisymmetric model consisting of a cylindrical probe, probe cover, skin and air was used as the computational model as shown in fig. 3. as boundary conditions, outside air temperature (tair) and airflow velocity (vair) were set on the upper surface of the air, outflow boundaries were set on the air side, core body temperature (tbody) was set on the lower surface of the skin, and thermally insulated boundaries were set on the skin side. additionally, the computation was conducted with the interface between the probe cover and the air assuming a noslip condition. the skin tissue was simply modeled as a uniform tissue with density ρ = 1109 kg/m3, k = 0.37 w/(m⋅k), and cp = 3391 j/ (kg⋅k) without considering the effect of sweat secretion on the skin surface and blood flow for focusing on the effect of ambient temperature and airflow changes. 2.3. experimental method based on the outcomes of the numerical analysis, experimental verification of the proposed method using a prototype was conducted. a cylindrical structure (rsen = 7.5 mm, tsen = 5.0 mm) with temperature sensors (lt 􀀀 2 n 􀀀 12, gram co., ltd.) embedded in the contact surface with the skin and the opposite surface was fabricated by molding polydimethylsiloxane (pdms) as a sensor probe constituting the prototype. uv-curable pdms (ker 􀀀 4690 - a/b, shin etsu silicone co., ltd.), which has less thermal shrinkage and is superior in moldability, was used for pdms, and the curing conditions during molding were similar to those of previous studies [26–28]. an aluminum cover structure (tcover, 1 = tcover, 2 = 2.5 mm) was fabricated by machining with an nc milling machine (ae 74, makino), a machining center (v 33 i, makino), and a wire-cut electric discharge machine (ad 􀀀 325 l ln 1 w, sodick) as the probe cover constituting the prototype. an in-vitro measurement system was constructed for the validation experiment. the system is consisted of a heater (nd-1 a, azone) that simulates core body temperature, ethylene-propylene diene monomer rubber (epdm) (10 mm thick) placed on the heater which close to the thermal conductivity of the skin [29–32], and the prototype placed on the epdm layer. in this experiment, the measured values of the prototype and the core body temperature estimated using eq. 5 were evaluated when an airflow change was applied from above the prototype by a fan whose wind velocity could be controlled by the number of revolutions. rskin(r-s1en +rl-e1ak) in eq. 5 was experimentally calculated from eq. 9 using he reference value of core body temperature (tref) and the measured value by the prototype (tskin, tsen) in the windless and steady state, and rskincskin in eq. 5 was set to a value that minimized the time integration of the absolute estimation error during the transient response using the generalized reduced gradient method. rskin 􀀀 rsen 􀀀 1+rleak 􀀀 1 ) = tref 􀀀 tskin tskin 􀀀 tsen (9) 3. results and discussion 3.1. numerical simulation 3.1.1. effect of thermal conductivity the relationship between the thermal conductivities of the constituent materials and the estimation error at steady state is shown in fig. 4. the calculations were conducted under the following conditions: tair = 20 ◦c, tbody = 37 ◦c, vin = 5 m/s, rsen = 15 mm, tsen = 5 mm, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. the results confirmed that there exists an optimum value for the thermal conductivity of the probe (kprobe), and that the higher the thermal conductivity of the probe cover (kcover), the smaller the estimation error. the former reason is considered to be that when kprobe is low, the unconsidered skin-air heat flow in eq. 5 increases and the estimation error increases in the proposed method, while when kprobe is high, the unconsidered heat flow from the skin around the probe to the probe in eq. 5 increases and the estimation error increases. the latter reason is considered to be that the higher kcover, the less the unconsidered heat flow in the proposed method described in the former reason, thus reducing the estimation error. based on the results, it is considered desirable that the probe material should have a thermal conductivity around 2 w/(m･k). however, since the materials in the fig. 3. two-dimensional axisymmetric computational model and the boundary conditions used to compute temperature distributions in the measurement system. fig. 4. calculation results of core body temperature estimation error in the proposed method in various thermal conductivities of sensor probe and probe cover (kprobe, kcover). y. hashimoto et al. sensors and actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 4 above range are brittle materials that are difficult to fabricate, such as glass and ceramics, polydimethylsiloxane (pdms) [33–35], which has a lower thermal conductivity but is superior in ease of fabrication, was adopted for further investigation. on the other hand, as for the cover material, it was decided to adopt aluminum [36–38], which has a relatively high thermal conductivity and is an inexpensive material with ease of fabrication, for further investigation. 3.1.2. effect of ambient temperature and airflow fig. 5 shows the calculation results of the estimation error at steady state when the ambient temperature and wind velocity change in both of the conventional and proposed method. the calculations were conducted under the following conditions: tbody = 37 ◦c, rsen = 15 mm, tsen = 5 mm, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. from the calculation results, it was confirmed that the proposed method estimates with higher accuracy over a wide temperature and wind velocity range than the conventional method. a common feature of them is that the estimation error tends to increase when the ambient temperature is low or the wind velocity is large. this is because the difference between the core body and ambient temperature increases when the ambient temperature is low, and the heat transfer coefficient of the air increases when the wind velocity is high, thereby increasing the skin-air heat transfer, which is an error factor for both methods. here, in order to analyze the horizontal heat flow in the skin, which is an error factor for both methods, the ratio of the heat flux in the normal direction in area ii to the sum of the heat fluxes in area i and area ii in the calculation domain shown in fig. 6a is defined as heat loss rate [%]. for example, in the conventional method, when tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 0 m/s (fig. 6b), the heat loss rate is 0.87%, while when tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 5.0 m/s (fig. 6c), the heat loss rate is 26.1%, indicating that the heat transfer in the horizontal direction increases due to the generation of the airflow. in the proposed method, the heat loss rate is 8.25% when tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 0 m/s (fig. 6d), while the heat loss rate is 8.83% when tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 5.0 m/s (fig. 6c), indicating that the effect of the airflow on the horizontal heat flow is reduced. it is considered that the above effect of the proposed method is one of the reasons to reduce the estimation error over a wide temperature and wind velocity range compared with the conventional method. 3.1.3. effect of size and shape fig. 7a shows the calculation results of the steady-state estimation error by the proposed method when the probe cover design parameters (tcover,1 and tcover,2) are changed, and fig. 7b shows the calculation results of the steady-state estimation error by the proposed method when the probe design parameters (rsen and tsen) are changed. the former was calculated with tair = 20 ◦c, tbody = 37 ◦c, vin = 5 m/s, rsen = 15 mm, tsen = 5 mm, and the latter was calculated with tair = 20 ◦c, tbody = 37 ◦c, vin = 5 m/s, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. from the calculation results, it was confirmed that the larger tcover,1 and rsen, and the smaller tcover,2 and tsen, the lower the estimation error. the increase in tcover,1 and rsen and the decrease in tcover,2 and tsen are considered to be due to the effect of reducing the thermal resistance of the probe cover and probe, which is similar to the effect of using probe covers and probes with high thermal conductivity. 3.1.4. effect of transient response one of the most common scenes in daily life is a scene in which a person stays in a hot environment for a long time and then moves to an air-conditioned room, and the calculation results of the time change in the estimation error of each method when the ambient temperature and wind velocity change rapidly are shown in fig. 8. in the calculation, first, the steady solution of the temperature distribution in the calculation area was calculated under the conditions of tair = 35 ◦c, tbody = 37 ◦c, vair = 0 m/s, rsen = 15 mm, tsen = 5 mm, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. next, as shown in fig. 8a, using the steady solution as the initial value, the transient solution of the temperature distribution was calculated as the ambient temperature and wind velocity changed from 35 ◦c to 20 ◦c and from 0 m/s to 5 m/s, respectively, between 60 and 180 s after the start of the calculation. finally, the estimation error of each time in each method was calculated using eqs. 1 and 5 (fig. 8b). in the case of the conventional method and the proposed method without considering cskin, it was confirmed that the estimation error increased due to changes in ambient temperature and wind velocity and then gradually decreased. fig. 9 shows the time variation of the sensing temperature (tskin, tsen) for each method and the absolute value of the time derivative of the temperature in the calculation domain at representative times. it takes about 30 min for the temperature field in the measurement area of both methods to stabilize. at the beginning of the calculation, both methods show large temperature changes. the conventional and proposed method without considering cskin is unable to cope with the temperature change, thus increasing the estimation error. on the other hand, the estimation error is reduced by compensating for the above temperature change at the time of estimation in the proposed method considering cskin. comparing with the maximum error, the error in the proposed method with and without considering cskin are 7.23 ◦c, 0.72 ◦c, respectively. comparing the root mean square error (rsme) for the first 30 min of the calculation, the error in the proposed method with and without considering cskin are 3.12 ◦c and 0.15 ◦c, respectively. the estimation errors were reduced by about 90% in terms of maximum error and by about 95% in terms of rsme, and it was confirmed that the estimation errors could be significantly reduced by the proposed method considering cskin from the both viewpoints. in addition, in order to quantitatively compare the time response, we compare the time from 180 s when the temperature and wind velocity changes end until the estimation error falls within ± 0.2 ◦c. the proposed method takes about 20 min 20 s without considering cskin, while the proposed method considering cskin takes about 1 min 50 s. the results confirm that the proposed method with cskin considered can improve the time response under the estimation compared with the method without considering cskin. 3.2. experiment with prototype fig. 10c shows the temporal changes in the heater temperature (equivalent to the reference value of core body temperature) and the estimated value when the airflow shown in fig. 10b is applied from directly above the prototype using the experimental system with the prototype described in 2.3 (fig. 10a). the measurement results of the conventional method, that is, the prototype without the aluminum cover, are also shown in the same figure. it was confirmed that the core body temperature was estimated in good response to the variation of the reference value in the proposed method, although a relatively large error occurred immediately after the large fluctuation of the airflow in the conventional method as with the numerical simulation results of the transient response shown in fig. 9. fig. 10d shows bland-altman plots of fig. 5. calculation results of core body temperature estimation errors for each method under various ambient temperature and airflow conditions. (a) conventional approach. (b) the proposed method. y. hashimoto et al. sensors and actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 5 the reference and estimated values in the proposed and conventional methods. overall, in the proposed method, it was confirmed that the estimation error was maintained within 0.076 ◦c, including the error at the time of airflow generation mentioned above. the estimation error is highly accurate compared to the maximum allowable error ( ± 0.2 ◦c) of a typical electronic thermometer. furthermore, comparing the measurement error (mean ± 3 sd) under each wind velocity, it was 0.0135 ± 0.0405 ◦c when a 1.4 m/s airflow was generated, and 0.0120 ± 0.0431 ◦c when a 4.4 m/s airflow was generated, indicating that the amount of airflow had little effect on the measurement error. from the result, it was experimentally confirmed that the proposed method, as well as the numerical analysis results, can measure core body temperature with high accuracy even during airflow. 3.3. limitations of the project the purpose of this study was to reduce the estimation error with the change of ambient temperature and airflow, which is one of the technical problems in the heat flux type core body temperature sensor, and the calculation and experimental method was simplified. in human trials, it is considered that phenomena which has not been considered in this study such as heat dissipation in the skin surface with sweating, change of skin blood flow, and generation of contact resistance between the skin and sensor in wearing become potential error factors in the proposed method. regarding the effect of heat dissipation by sweating, it has been reported that the secretion of sweat from the skin around the probe can be suppressed by keeping the pressure on the skin when the probe is attached above a certain threshold [39], and it is considered that the error can be reduced by utilizing such the phenomenon. on the effect of the skin blood flow changes, it is considered that the effect can be suppressed by choosing the part with little effect of the blood flow as the measuring part. on the contact resistance between the skin and the probe in the mounting, it is considered that it can be reduced by providing the mounting method which can sufficiently maintain the adhesion between the skin and the probe. 4. conclusion in this study, we proposed a new measurement method to reduce the estimation error associated with changes of ambient temperature and fig. 6. (a) the idea of heat loss rate in the numerical domain. results of each method and calculation of temperature distribution and heat loss rate for each boundary condition. (b) conventional method at tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 0 m/s. (c) conventional method at tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 5 m/s. (d) the proposed method at tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 0 m/s. (e) the proposed method at tair = 20 ◦c and vair = 5 m/s. color bars are common in (b) - (e). scale bar is 10 mm. fig. 7. results of calculation of estimation error of the proposed method due to difference in size and shape of components. (a) the probe cover. (b) the probe. fig. 8. (a) temporal changes in ambient temperature and wind velocity. (b) time variation of estimation error in each method when ambient temperature and wind velocity are changed rapidly. y. hashimoto et al. sensors and actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 6 airflow, which is one of the technical issues in non-invasive core body temperature measurement with the conventional heat flux methods, which is vital biological information for countermeasures of heat-related illnesses, and performed basic evaluations of the performance in the proposed method by the numerical analysis. first, we evaluated the effect of changes in temperature and wind velocity on the accuracy of core body temperature estimation using the conventional and proposed methods, and confirmed that the proposed method reduced the estimation error over a wider range of ambient temperature and wind velocity compared with the conventional method. next, the effect of component size on the performance of the proposed method was evaluated, and it was confirmed that the estimation error decreased as the thickness of the probe cover and that of sensor probe increased, and that the same effect could be obtained by using materials with high thermal conductivity. furthermore, the effects of transient response were evaluated, and it was confirmed that the proposed method could simultaneously improve the estimation accuracy and time response. we also conducted performance evaluation experiments with the prototype based on the basis of the results of numerical analysis. the in vitro experimental system was constructed to evaluate the estimation error in response to airflow changes. as a result, it was confirmed that it was possible to estimate core body temperature with high accuracy without being affected by airflow changes. based on the above, we conducted basic evaluations of the proposed method from both theoretical and experimental perspectives, and showed its validity. this result will greatly contribute to the future development of heat flux-type core body temperature sensors. as a future prospect, we believe that more realistic environmental assessments and verification using measured data are necessary, and we plan to further improve and optimize our core temperature estimation method to achieve higher accuracy. fig. 9. spatial distribution of the absolute value (| dt/dt |) of the time derivative of temperature calculated by each method at representative times when temperature and wind velocity are rapidly changed. (a) proposed method, 3 min elapsed. (b) proposed method, 10 min elapsed. (c) proposed method, 30 min elapsed. (d) conventional method, 3 min elapsed. (e) conventional method, 10 min elapsed. (f) conventional method, 30 min elapsed. (g) time variation of tskin and tsen calculated by each method. fig. 10. (a) a prototype based on the proposed method. (b) time variation of wind velocity applied in evaluation experiments using the prototype. (c) estimation error in the conventional and proposed methods in the experiment. (d) bland-altman plots of reference and estimated core body temperature by the conventional and proposed methods in the experiment. y. hashimoto et al. sensors and actuators: a. physical 368 (2024) 115136 7 credit authorship contribution statement nishida yoshifumi: writing – review & editing, writing – original draft, resources. tada soto: writing – review & editing, data curation, conceptualization. hashimoto yuki: writing – review & editing, writing – original draft, resources, project administration, methodology, investigation, funding acquisition, formal analysis, data curation, conceptualization. declaration of competing interest the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. data availability data will be made available on request. acknowledgements this work was supported by jsps kakenhi grant number 23k19094. references [1] t. deryugina, how do people update? the effects of local weather fluctuations on beliefs about global warming, clim. change 118 (2013) 397–416. [2] j.h. diaz, the influence of global warming on natural disasters and their public health outcomes, am. j. disaster med. 2 (2007) 33–42. [3] y. uchida, m. izumizaki, modulation of acyl and des-acyl ghrelin on autonomic and behavioral thermoregulation in various ambient temperatures, j. therm. biol. 113 (2023) 103543. [4] n.t. toosty, a. hagishima, k. tanaka, heat health risk assessment analysing heatstroke patients in fukuoka city, japan, plos one 16 (2021) e0253011. [5] t. kamiya, r. onishi, s. kodera, a. hirata, estimation of time-course core temperature and water loss in realistic adult and child models with urban micrometeorology prediction, int. j. environ. res. public health 16 (2019) 5097. [6] a. bouchama, j.p. knochel, heat stroke, n. engl. j. med. 346 (2002) 1978–1988. [7] d.t. lamarche, r.d. meade, a.w. d’souza, a.d. flouris, s.g. hardcastle, r.j. sigal, p. boulay, g.p. kenny, the recommended threshold limit values for heat exposure fail to maintain body core temperature within safe limits in older working adults, j. occup. environ. hyg. 14 (2017) 703–711. [8] g.p. kenny, s.r. notley, a.d. flouris, a. grundstein, climate change and heat exposure: impact on health in occupational and general populations, impact on health in occupational and general populations. in: adams, w., jardine, j. (eds) exertional heat illness. springer, cham. (2019). [9] k. tokizawa, heat-induced labor loss and growing global concerns in a warmer world, ind. health 60 (2022) 499–500. [10] k. tokizawa, t. shimuta, h. tsuchimoto, validity of a wearable core temperature estimation system in heat using patch-type sensors on the chest, j. therm. biol. 108 (2022) 103294. [11] k. levels, j.j. de koning, c. foster, h.a.m. daanen, the effect of skin temperature on performance during a 7.5-km cycling time trial, eur. j. appl. physiol. 112 (2012) 3387–3395. [12] y. hosokawa, w.m. adams, r.l. stearns, d.j. casa, comparison of gastrointestinal and rectal temperatures during recovery after a warm-weather road race, j. athl. train. 51 (2016) 382–388. [13] h.a.m. daanen, v. kohlen, l.p.j. teunissen, heat flux systems for body core temperature assessment during exercise, j. therm. biol. 112 (2023) 103480. [14] s.r. notley, r.d. meade, g.p. kenny, time following ingestion does not influence the validity of telemetry pill measurements of core temperature during exerciseheat stress, j. temperaure toolbox 8 (2021) 12–20. [15] d.m. wilkinson, j.m. carter, v.l. richmond, s.d. blacker, m.p. rayson, the effect of cool water ingestion on gastrointestinal pill temperature, med. sci. sports exerc. 40 (2008) 523–528. [16] h.c. gunga, m. sandsund, r.e. reinertsen, f. sattler, j. koch, a non-invasive device to continuously determine heat strain in humans, j. therm. biol. 33 (2008) 297–307. [17] h.c. gunga, a. werner, a. stahn, m. steinach, t. schlabs, e. koralewski, d. kunz, d.l. belavý, d. felsenberg, f. sattler, j. koch, the double sensor—a non-invasive device to continuously monitor core temperature in humans on earth and in space, respir. physiol. neurobiol. 169 (2009) 563–568. [18] k. kitamura, x. zhu, w. chen, t. nemoto, development of a new method for the noninvasive measurement of deep body temperature without a heater, med. eng. phys. 32 (2010) 1–6. [19] s.y. kim, w.k. lee, h.j. baek, k.s. park, a nonintrusive temperature measuring system for estimating deep body temperature in bed, 2012 annual international conference of the ieee engineering in medicine and biology society, (2012). [20] y. zhang, r.c. webb, h. luo, y. xue, j. kurniawan, n.h. cho, s. krishnan, y. li, y. huang, j.a. rogers, theoretical and experimental studies of epidermal heat flux sensors for measurements of core body temperature, adv. healthc. mater. 5 (2016) 119–127. [21] m. huang, t. tamura, z. tang, w. chen, s. kanaya, a wearable thermometry for core body temperature measurement and its experimental verification, ieee j. biomed. health inform. 21 (2017) 708–714. [22] d. janke, n. kagelmann, c. storm, m.a. maggioni, c. kienast, h.-c. gunga, o. opatz, measuring core body temperaure using a non-invasive, disposable double-sensor during targeted temperature management in post-cardiac arrest patients, front. med. 8 (2021) 666908. [23] a.p. welles, x. xu, w.r. santee, d.p. looney, m.j. buller, a.w. potter, r.w. hoyt, estimation of core body temperature from skin temperature, heat flux, and heart rate using a kalman filter, comput. biol. med. 99 (2018) 1–6. [24] s. morville, m. carin, m. muller, m. gharbim p. peyre, d. carron, p. lemasson, r. fabbro, 2d axial-symmetric model for fluid flow and heat transfer in the melting and resolidification of a vertical cylinder, the proceedings of the comsol conference 2010 paris, (2010), 17–19. [25] m.b. turgay, a.g. yazıcıo˘glu, numerical simulation of fluid flow and heat transfer in a trapezoidal microchannel with comsol multiphysics: a case study, numer. heat. transf.: part a 73 (2018) 332–346. [26] k. mogi, y. hashimoto, t. tsukahara, m. terano, m. yoshino, t. yamamoto, nanometer-level high-accuracy molding using a photo-curable silicone elastomer by suppressing thermal shrinkage, rsc adv. 5 (2015) 10172–10177. [27] k. mogi, k. sakata, y. hashimoto, t. yamamoto, a novel fabrication technique for liquid-tight microchannels by combination of a paraffin polymer and a photocurable silicone elastomer, materials 9 (2016) 621. [28] y. hashimoto, k. mogi, t. yamamoto, vacuum ultraviolet light assisted bonding and nanoscale pattern transfer method for polydimethylsiloxane, microelectron. eng. 176 (2017) 116–120. [29] t. okabe, t. fujimura, j. okajima, s. aiba, s. maruyama, non-invasive measurement of effective thermal conductivity of human skin with a guard-heated thermistor probe, int. j. heat. mass transf. 126 (2018) 625–635. [30] k. ito, y. ban, s. warisawa, coldness presentation depending on motion to enhance the sense of presence in a virtual underwater experience, ieee access 10 (2022) 23463–23476. [31] a.m. el-dakhakhny, a.f. ahmed, s. el-marsafy, e. abadeer, effect of adding fibers and nano particles on the thermal and ablative properties of epdm rubber thermal insulators for solid rocket motor application, int. j. eng. res. technol. 6 (2017) 405–412. [32] a. ma, x. wang, y. chen, j. yu, w. zheng, y. zhao, largely enhanced thermal conductivity of ethylene-propylene-diene monomer composites by addition of graphene ball, compos. commun. 13 (2019) 119–124. [33] f.j.m. ruiz-cabello, s. bermúdez-romero, p.f. ib´a˜nez-ib´a˜nez, m.a. cabrerizo- vílchez, m.a. rodríguez-valverde, freezing delay of sessile drops: probing the impact of contact angle, surface roughness and thermal conductivity, appl. surf. sci. 537 (2021) 147964. [34] x. zhang, h. zhang, d. li, h. xu, y. huang, y. liu, d. wu, j. sun, highly thermally conductive and electrically insulating polydimethylsiloxane composites prepared by ultrasonic-assisted forced infiltration for thermal management applications, compos. part b: eng. 224 (2021) 109207. [35] m.i. ralphs, n. kemme, p.b. vartak, e. joseph, s. tipnis, s. turnage, k.n. solanki, r.y. wang, k. rykaczewski, in situ alloying of thermally conductive polymer composites by combining liquid and solid metal microadditives, appl. mater. interfaces 10 (2018) 2083–2092. [36] l.f. mondolfo, aluminum alloys: structure and properties, elsevier, (1976). [37] j.r. davis, aluminum and aluminum alloys, asm international, (1993). [38] a. lombardi, f. d’elia, c. ravindran, r. mackay, replication of engine block cylinder bridge microstructure and mechanical properties with lab scale 319 al alloy billet castings, mater. charact. 87 (2014) 125–137. [39] r. fei, s.r. notley, e.a. taylor, c.a. burdon, n. ohnishi, n.a.s. taylor, revisiting the dermatomal recruitment of, and pressure-dependent influences on, human eccrine sweating, j. therm. biol. 82 (2019) 52–62. yuki hashimoto he received a b.e., m.e., and ph.d. in engineering from tokyo institute of technology in 2013, 2015, and 2018. he joined ntt device innovation center in 2018. in 2023, he joined tokyo institute of technology as a assistant professor, and is currently researching wearable healthcare devices for management of heat stress. he is a member of the japan society of mechanical engineers and the institute of electrical engineers of japan. soto tada he is currently an undergraduate student at tokyo institute of technology and is engaged in research on wearable sensors for heat countermeasures. yoshifumi nishida he received the phd degree from the graduate school of mechanical engineering, university of tokyo, in 1998. in 1998, he joined intelligent system division of electrotechnical laboratory, ministry of international trade and industry (miti), japan. in 2001, he joined digital human laboratory of the national institute of advanced industrial science and technology (aist). from 2013 to 2019, he was also a prime senior research scientist with aist. in april 2019, he joined tokyo institute of technology as a professor. he is a member of the ieee, robotics society of japan, and the japanese society of artificial intelligence. y. hashimoto et al.
