<<<<<<< HEAD
Strategies for greenhouse gas emissions mitigation in Mediterranean
agriculture: A review
A. Sanz-Cobenaa,*, L. Lassalettab, E. Aguilerac, A. del Pradod, J. Garniere,f, G. Billene,f,
A. Iglesiasa, B. Sáncheza, G. Guardiaa, D. Abalosg, D. Plaza-Bonillah,
I. Puigdueta-Bartoloméa, R. Morali, E. Galánd, H. Arriagaj, P. Merinoj, J. Infante-Amatec,
A. Meijidek, G. Pardod, J. Álvaro-Fuentesl, C. Gilsanzm, D. Báezm, J. Doltran,
S. González-Ubiernao, M.L. Cayuelap, S. Menéndezq, E. Díaz-Pinésr, J. Le-Noëf,
M. Quemadaa, F. Estelléss, S. Calvets, H.J.M. van Grinsvenb, H. Westhoekb, M.J. Sanzd,
B.S. Gimenot, A. Vallejoa, P. Smithu
a ETSI Agronomos, Technical University of Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain
b PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, PO Box 30314, 2500 GH The Hague, The Netherlands
c Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Ctra. de Utrera, km. 1, 41013, Sevilla, Spain
d Basque Centre for Climate Change (BC3), Edificio Sede No 1, Planta 1a, Parque Científico de UPV/EHU, Barrio Sarriena s/n, 48940 Leioa (Bizkaia), Spain
e CNRS, UMR Metis 7619, BP105, 4 place Jussieu, 75005, Paris, France
f UPMC, UMR Metis 7619, BP105, 4 place Jussieu, 75005, Paris, France
g Department of Soil Quality, Wageningen University, PO Box 47, Droevendaalsesteeg 4, Wageningen 6700AA, The Netherlands
h INRA, UMR-AGIR, 24 Chemin de Borde Rouge – Auzeville, CS 52627, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan cedex, France
i Department of Agrochemistry and Environment, EPSO, Miguel Hernandez University, 03312 Orihuela, Alicante, Spain
j NEIKER-Tecnalia, Conservation of Natural Resources, Bizkaia Technology Park, P. 812, 48160, Derio, Bizkaia, Spain
k Bioclimatology, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Büsgenweg 2, 37077, Göttingen, Germany
l Soil and Water Dpt, Estación, Experimental de Aula Dei (EEAD), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Av. Montañana, 1005, 50059 Zaragoza, Spain
mMabegondo Agricultural Research Centre (CIAM-INGACAL), Xunta de Galicia, Carretera AC-542 de Betanzos a Mesón do Vento, km 7, 15318 Abegondo, A
Coruña, Spain
n Cantabrian Agricultural Research and Training Centre, CIFA, c/Héroes 2 de Mayo 27, 39600 Muriedas, Spain
o Faculty of Pharmacy, Complutense University of Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, Pza. Ramón y Cajal s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain
p Departamento de Conservación de Suelos y Aguas y Manejo de Residuos Orgánicos, CEBAS-CSIC, Campus Universitario de Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain
q University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Department of Plant Biology and Ecology, Apdo. 644, 48080, Bilbao, Spain
r Institute of Meteorology and Climate Research, Atmospheric Environmental Research, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Kreuzeckbahnstr. 19, 82467
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany
s ICTA, Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n 46022, Valencia, Spain
t Ecotoxicology of Air Pollution, CIEMAT. Avda. Complutense 22, 28040 Madrid, Spain
u Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 23 St Machar Drive,Aberdeen, AB24 3UU, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Article history:
Received 21 April 2016
Received in revised form 28 September 2016
Accepted 30 September 2016
Available online 5 December 2016
Keywords:
Cropping systems
GHG
Mitigation
Mediterranean climate
Review
A B S T R A C T
An integrated assessment of the potential of different management practices for mitigating specific
components of the total GHG budget (N2O and CH4 emissions and C sequestration) of Mediterranean
agrosystems was performed in this study. Their suitability regarding both yield and environmental (e.g.
nitrate leaching and ammonia volatilization) sustainability, and regional barriers and opportunities for
their implementation were also considered. Based on its results best strategies to abate GHG emissions in
Mediterranean agro-systems were proposed. Adjusting N fertilization to crop needs in both irrigated and
rain-fed systems could reduce N2O emissions up to 50% compared with a non-adjusted practice.
Substitution of N synthetic fertilizers by solid manure can be also implemented in those systems, and
may abate N2O emissions by about 20% under Mediterranean conditions, with additional indirect
benefits associated to energy savings and positive effects in crop yields. The use of urease and nitrification
inhibitors enhances N use efficiency of the cropping systems and may mitigate N2O emissions up to 80%
and 50%, respectively. The type of irrigation may also have a great mitigation potential in the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: a.sanz@upm.es (A. Sanz-Cobena).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.09.038
0167-8809/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment
journal homepage: www.elsev ier.com/locate /agee
Mediterranean region. Drip-irrigated systems have on average 80% lower N2O emissions than sprinkler
systems and drip-irrigation combined with optimized fertilization showed a reduction in direct N2O
emissions up to 50%. Methane
fluxes have a relatively small contribution to the total GHG budget of
Mediterranean crops, which can mostly be controlled by careful management of the water table and
organic inputs in paddies. Reduced soil tillage, improved management of crop residues and agro-industry
by-products, and cover cropping in orchards, are the most suitable interventions to enhance organic C
stocks in Mediterranean agricultural soils. The adoption of the proposed agricultural practices will
require farmers training. The global analysis of life cycle emissions associated to irrigation type (drip,
sprinkle and furrow) and N fertilization rate (100 and 300 kg N ha1 yr1) revealed that these factors may
outweigh the reduction in GHG emissions beyond the plot scale. The analysis of the impact of some
structural changes on top-down mitigation of GHG emissions revealed that 3–15% of N2O emissions could
be suppressed by avoiding food waste at the end-consumer level. A 40% reduction in meat and dairy
consumption could reduce GHG emissions by 20–30%. Reintroducing the Mediterranean diet (i.e.
35%
intake of animal protein) would therefore result in a significant decrease of GHG emissions from
agricultural production systems under Mediterranean conditions.
© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Mediterranean climate, found from 20 latitude onwards, is
characterized by having mild winters and warm summers.
Precipitation during summer period, when highest temperatures
occur, is scarce, so most summer crops require irrigation to achieve
worthwhile yields. Mediterranean climate is neither desert
climate, nor humid, and three subtypes can be distinguished:
humid or rainy Mediterranean (Ln – Seasonal rainfall surplus –
higher than 20% of annual PET – potential evapotranspiration); dry
Mediterranean, and semiarid Mediterranean (drier than dry
Mediterranean climate) (Ln < 20% PET) (Papadakis, 1966). Over
one half of the area with Mediterranean-type climate worldwide is
found in the Mediterranean Sea Basin (Aschmann, 1973), but it is
also present in four other regions of the world namely California
(USA), Central Chile, the Cape region of South Africa, and South-
West Australia (Fig. 1).
In the case of Mediterranean agricultural systems, the temporal
gap between maximum irradiance and temperature (early
summer) and maximum water availability (winter), added to
the low organic matter (OM) content of most cropped soils, are
important drivers of the typically low productivity of rain-fed
crops. On the contrary, irrigated agriculture benefits from the solar
radiation and extended frost-free periods to make these areas
capable of high crops yields. The different soil conditions between
irrigated and rain-fed crops greatly affect soil microbial processes,
which control the
fluxes of C (carbon dioxide, CO2; methane, CH4;
organic carbon) and N (nitrous oxide, N2O; molecular nitrogen, N2;
nitrate, NO3
; ammonia, NH3) in soil.
Pedoclimatic conditions shape soil processes in Mediterranean
cropping systems, leading to different N2O emission patterns
compared to temperate soils (Aguilera et al., 2013b). Nitrification
and nitrifier-denitrification, and not denitrification, are very often
the main pathways leading to emissions of N oxides in rain-fed
Mediterranean cropping system (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2008; Kool
et al., 2011; Aguilera et al., 2013b; Vallejo et al., 2014). These two
processes are favoured by conditions of soil water content (i.e.,
water
filled pore space, WFPS) under saturation (i.e. 40–60%
WFPS). Denitrification may play a predominant role in anaerobic
soil microsites (Davidson et al., 1991) in intensively managed and
irrigated systems (e.g., Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012, 2014c). Consequently,
different cumulative N2O emissions have been proposed
for rain-fed crops (0.7 kg N2ON ha1 yr1) and for e.g., sprinkler
irrigated crops in Mediterranean areas (4.4 kg N2ON ha1 yr1)
Fig. 1. Regions of the world with Mediterranean climate.
6 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
(Cayuela et al., 2017). Thus, the importance and potential for N2O
mitigation and the best mitigation strategy differ greatly depending
on the cropping system.
Paddy soils account for 6% of the total CH4 emissions from
Mediterranean agriculture (Tate, 2015). Large CH4 emissions in
these
flooded soils are generated through methanogenesis under
strict anaerobic conditions and low oxido-reduction potentials (Le
Mer and Roger, 2001). On the contrary, aerobic agricultural soils,
both rain-fed and irrigated, promote CH4 oxidation, which is very
dependent on management practices such as N fertilization.
Agricultural management strategies based on reducing methanogenesis
in paddy soils, or enhancement of CH4 oxidation in aerated
soils, are often ignored in Mediterranean agriculture, yet they may
contribute substantially to reduce total GHG emissions from these
systems.
Increasing the generally low C content of Mediterranean soils is
an important GHG mitigation strategy (Robertson et al., 2000), and
is also a priority for preventing erosion and improving soil quality.
In this review we have synthesized and analyzed the perfor-
mance of agronomic GHG mitigation practices in Mediterranean
cropping systems aiming to i) decrease soil N2O emissions; ii)
enhance CH4 oxidation and decrease CH4 emission rates; iii)
enhance soil organic C stocks and iv) reduce or leave unchanged
other sources of environmental pollution (e.g. NH3 volatilization
and NO3
 leaching). The effect on the total GHG budget of the
selected strategies was also analyzed to establish an order of
priority. The review also includes an assessment of the socioeconomic
performance of agronomic measures and constraints to
implementation. Finally, we explored the potential of structural
measures at the agro-food system scale for reducing GHGs
emissions: i) food waste reduction, ii) change in the composition
of human diet, particularly in the proportion of animal products,
and iii) reconnection between crops and livestock at farm or
regional scale for optimization of resource use.
2. Agronomic mitigation measures
2.1. Agronomic practices affecting N2O emissions
As previously explained, Mediterranean climatic conditions
lead to the existence of two main contrasting production systems,
rain-fed and irrigated, largely differing in terms of crop management
and, consequently, N2O emission processes. Rain-fed
systems, mostly based on winter crops, are characterized by
periods with low soil moisture and cold temperatures, thus with
decreased soil microbiological activity and N2O
fluxes. The IPCC
(2006) has proposed a 1% emission factor (EF, i.e. the percentage of
fertilizer N applied that is transformed and emitted back to the
atmosphere as N2O) at Tier 1 (Tier 1 default EF1 proposed by IPCC,
2006) for N2O emissions. However, two recent reviews have shown
that N2O emission factors from rain-fed Mediterranean cropping
systems are much lower than the default 1% (i.e. Aguilera et al.,
2013b; Cayuela et al., 2017). Irrigated systems receive large
amounts of water and N inputs which create favorable soil
conditions for N2O production. Emission factors in these systems
fluctuate greatly according to water management and the type and
amount of fertilizer used (e.g., synthetic, solid or liquid manures).
Sprinkler irrigated crops led to a N2O EF similar to those of
temperate areas of about 1%; conversely, drip irrigated systems
emit at a much lower rate (0.18) (Cayuela et al., 2017).
2.1.1. Nitrogen fertilization
Optimized N fertilizers application (in terms of input rate and
time of application), as well as the careful selection of the type of
fertilizer used are crucial to reduce N2O emissions. Synthetic and
organic fertilizers are the most widespread sources of environ-
mental N contamination in Mediterranean areas with dense
concentration of livestock, due to the losses of N coming from
unadjusted fertilizer application (e.g., Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b).
An additional mitigation effect could be achieved by applying
already existing N (organic fertilizer) when possible or with the use
of nitrification and urease inhibitors.
2.1.1.1. Adjusting N fertilization to crop needs. Recommendations on
N application rates, based on a careful estimation of crop needs,
aim to achieve optimum yields while reducing N pollution.
Reduction of N rates according to soil N availability and crop
yield potential may decrease N surpluses and subsequent direct
and indirect N2O emissions, while saving energy and abating other
GHG emissions (e.g. associated to manufacturing synthetic
fertilizers). Current national emission inventory methods mostly
use the 1% Tier 1 EF (IPCC, 2006). However, many studies
concluded that the response of direct N2O emission to N input
is non-linear (Philibert et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2013; Shcherbak
et al., 2014), and other management factors, as constrained by
climate, must be considered in determining N2O emissions
(Bouwman et al., 2002; Leip et al., 2011; Lesschen et al., 2011;
Aguilera et al., 2013a). For example, significant effects of N
application timing on N2O emissions have been reported from
cereal crops in Mediterranean countries such as Spain (Abalos
et al., 2016). The estimated N2O mitigation potential, through
adjusted fertilization (rate and timing) in Mediterranean agroecosystems
ranges between 30 and 50% compared to a nonadjusted
practice (Table 1).
2.1.1.2. Substituting synthetic fertilizers by organic
fertilizers. Differences among fertilizer N sources in N2O
emissions depend on site- and weather-specific conditions
(Snyder et al., 2009). Replacing mineral N with organic
fertilization provides not only NPK and micronutrients to the
soil and crop, but also organic C when using solid fertilizers (i.e.,
solid manure, composts, etc.), which is highly beneficial in
Mediterranean soils with low organic C contents (Aguilera et al.,
2013b). In areas were croplands co-exist with livestock farms,
using a farm sub-product allows the reuse/recovery of farm
products, thus decreasing the volume of waste that needs to be
managed, and then avoiding the emission of GHG both in the
management of such wastes and in the manufacturing of new
synthetic fertilizers. In Mediterranean areas, the efficient use of
manure of fertilizer should beencouraged, and this could be
facilitated by increased cooperation between farmer's unions.
Mineral N is released slowly when solid organic fertilizers are
used so N delivery can be better coupled with crop needs over time.
This may decrease the need of synthetic fertilizers, thus saving
energy and avoiding emissions produced beyond the boundaries of
the farm during the industrial Haber-Bosch process of N
fixation. In
contrast, since the N content of manures is normally lower than
that of synthetic fertilizers, the amount of organic matter to be
applied in order to fulfil crop needs is high, so an increase in
transport expenses and emissions would be expected unless
manures are applied nearby the source.
Replacing synthetic fertilizers with organic ones is applicable to
field crops such as cereals and oilseeds, given their high N demand.
It is applicable to both irrigated and rain-fed systems, under
Mediterranean conditions. Medium-textured and well-drained
soils are the most suitable for this practice since they can
counterbalance the N2O denitrification losses associated to high C-
1 EF1 for N additions from mineral fertilizers, organic amendments and crop
residues, and N mineralised from mineral soil as a result of loss of soil carbon. TABLE
11.1, IPCC (2006) National GHG Inventory Guidelines. Volume IV (AFOLU), Chapter
11.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 7
content organic amendments (Velthof et al., 2003), whereas
poorly-aerated soils tend to stimulate denitrification (Rochette,
2008). Technical issues related to temporal and spatial availability
of animal manures must be considered. Intensive livestock
production systems are often decoupled from agricultural systems.
This causes mismatches between manure production and crop
requirements, resulting in manure excess at a local scale. Thus,
manure has to be transported to longer distances and/or treated
before being applied, resulting in higher manure management
costs (Teira-Esmatges and Flotats, 2003; Flotats et al., 2009).
The N2O emission reduction at plot scale depends on the form
of manure used. Solid manures have proved to significantly
decrease N2O emissions (ca. 23%) in Mediterranean systems
(Aguilera et al., 2013b) and to have the potential to increase C
sequestration in the long term (Ding et al., 2012). Webb et al.
(2004) observed that solid manure incorporation decreased N2O
Table 1
GHG mitigation performance, costs and benefits and side-effects of agronomic practices in Mediterranean cropping systems.
Group of measures Mitigation measure Direct GHG
abated
% of
mitigation
Potential
cost (2)
Potential
benefit
(2)
Potential positive and negative side-effects (3)
Other pollutant on farm
GHG
mitigation
out farm
GHG
increase
outside the
farm
Reduced
pollutant
Increased
pollutant
Crop yield
change on
farm
Agronomic measures (1)
Optimal
fertilization
Adjust N fertilization
to crop needs
N2O 30–50 ** ***** Indirect N2O NO3
, NH3 No effect
Fertigation N2O 30–50 *** **** Indirect N2O NO3
 Increase
Substitute synthetic
fertilizers by manures
N2O 20–50 ** **** Indirect N2O,
CO2
CH4 P, NOx, C
sequestration
NH3,
heavy
metals
No effect
Manures and
slurries
Injection of slurries C seq. 010 **** ** Indirect N2O NH3 NO3
, CH4 Decrease
Immediate
incorporation of
manures after
application
C seq./N2O 010 ** ** Indirect N2O NH3 NO3
, CH4 Increase
Inhibitors Use of nitrification
inhibitors
N2O 30–50 **** *** Indirect N2O CO2
c NO, NO3
 NH3 Increasea
Use of urease
inhibitors
N2O 30–60 **** *** Indirect N2O CO2
c NO, NH3 Increase
Crop Rotations and
cover crops
Cover crops C seq. 010 ** *** CO2
c/Indirect
N2O
NH3, NO3
, P Variable
Crop Rotations C seq. – * *** CO2
c – – Increase
Irrigation Improved Irrigation
technology
N2O/CH4
b 50–70 ** *** Indirect N2O NO3
 NO, CH4
b Increase
Soil tillage Low/no tillage C seq. – ** *** CO2
c NO3, NH3 N2O Increase
Crop residues and
agro-industry
by-products
Crop residues
mulching
C seq. 50–70 * ** CO2
c NH3 Long-term
increase
Crop residues
incorporation
C seq. 50–70 * * CO2
c NH3 CH4
d Long-term
increase
Use of by-products C seq. 50–70 * ** CO2
c NH3 Long-term
increase
Composted sewage
sludge
Application of
composted sewage
sludge
C seq. *** *** CO2
c Heavy metals CO2, NO
Biochar Use of biochar C seq./N2O 050 *** *** Indirect N2O,
CO2
CO2
c NO3

, Heavy
metals
Variable
Structural measures (1)
Reducing food waste C seq./N2O *** GHG indirect NO3
, NH3;
NOx
Non-
applicable
Reduction of animal
protein consumption
C seq./N2O 20–30 *** GHG indirect NO3
, NH3,
NOX
Non-
applicable
Reconnect crop and
livestock areas
C seq./N2O Variable GHG indirect NO3
, NH3 Variable
(1) Agronomic (existing or new technical implementation), or structural (change in social behaviour or agronomic organization); (2) Costs and benefits: From 1 (very low) to 5
(very high), based on expert judge and existing literature; (3) Potential positive and negative side effects.
aDMPP appears not to affect yield but DCD may provide a slight yield increase (5–10%).
b CH4 oxidation favoured.
c CO2 due to energy consumption/transport.
d emissions in paddy soils due to straw addition.
8 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
emissions, but Thorman et al. (2007) found no consistent effect of
incorporation of pig or cattle farmyard manure on such losses,
except when denitrification is likely to be intense. However, as the
readily-degradable C is mainly lost during the storage stage of solid
manures, the C added to soil by incorporation will have less effect
on the metabolism of denitrifiers (Webb et al., 2010). Overall,
incorporation of solid manure in Mediterranean regions appears to
reduce or have no impact on N2O emissions (Table 1).
For liquid manures (i.e., slurries), no significant differences have
been observed when these substitute synthetic N sources. This
seems to be a consequence of the strong similarities between
available N, in the form of NH4
+, in both fertilizer types (Meijide
et al., 2009; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2014a). Other studies indicate that
the method of slurry application is a key variable driving N2O
emissions from agricultural soils. According to a meta-analysis by
Hou et al. (2015), injection of slurry could significantly increase
direct emissions compared with broadcast application. However,
in Mediterranean areas, dry matter content of slurries under dry
weather conditions is normally high, thus reducing the potential of
implementing injection practices. In cases of implementation, soil
conditions appear to be the key factor affecting the direct and
indirect N2O emission pattern after slurry injection (VanderZaag
et al., 2011). The addition of readily-mineralizable C from slurry has
been shown to be the main driver for increasing emissions of N2O
by denitrifiers (Webb et al., 2010). If slurries are applied to crops, a
social constraint related to smells and health issues may arise (Cole
et al., 2000). This could be alleviated by restricting their use near
towns or populated areas. Additionally, accumulation of heavy
metals in the soil (e.g., zinc and copper present in animal diet) may
represent a barrier for using these organic materials (Berenguer
et al., 2008) (Table 2). There are also risks of antibiotic
contamination of soils, and leaching when using manure (Díaz-
Cruz, 2003).
2.1.1.3. Nitrification and urease inhibitors. Nitrification inhibitors
(NIs) deactivate the enzyme responsible for the
first step of
nitrification, the oxidation of NH4
+ to NO2
. By reducing
nitrification rates, and subsequently the substrate for
denitrification, the use of NIs may lead to reductions of N2O
emissions ranging from 30 to 50% (Huérfano et al., 2015) (Table 1).
Nitrification inhibitors are used in a wide range of agro-climatic
regions (Akiyama et al., 2010; Gilsanz et al., 2016). In Mediterra-
nean soils, NIs have shown high mitigation efficiency in rain-fed
and irrigated
fields, with a likely indirect effect on denitrification in
the latter systems (Meijide et al., 2010). Soil texture may regulate
mitigation efficiency (Barth et al., 2008) but to a limited extent,
since soil texture has been shown to have a small influence on the
inhibition of nitrification (Gilsanz et al., 2016)
Other soil parameters such as pH (with better performance in
acidic soils) or organic C may affect the efficacy of NIs (Robinson
et al., 2014; Marsden et al., 2015), especially for dicyandiamide
(DCD), which explains the high efficiencies reported by studies
performed in low-C Mediterranean soils. An inverse relationship
between the inhibitory effect and temperature has also been
described (Gilsanz et al., 2016), and should be considered when
choosing the optimum application timing in each season.
The main limitation for implementation of NIs is the increase of
fertilization costs (Timilsena et al., 2015). This could be counter-
balanced by an increment in crop productivity (Abalos et al.,
2014a). A potential enhancement in crop N use efficiency (Abalos
et al., 2014a) may reduce N losses and may thus decrease the rate of
synthetic N applied, reducing fertilization costs. Moreover, the use
of inhibitors could simplify the task of fertilization by reducing the
number of required applications, or by allowing for a greater
flexibility in the timing of fertilizer application (Linzmeier et al.,
2001).
Urease inhibitors (UIs) are used to reduce the activity of the
urea hydrolase enzyme. Therefore, they can only be used when
urea or urea-containing fertilizers (including organic sources) are
used. Originally developed to reduce NH3 volatilization, recent
research has shown that these products may also reduce N2O
emissions (Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012, 2016). Among the various
types of UIs available, N-(n-butyl) thiophosphorictriamide (NBPT)
has received the greatest commercial use (Sanz-Cobena et al.,
2008; Abalos et al., 2014a). Recent studies have evaluated the
effectiveness of NBPT to abate N2O emissions in Mediterranean
cropping systems, showing a high mitigation potential in an
irrigated maize-field with nitrification-favoring conditions (55%;
Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012), and in a rain-fed barley crop (86%;
Abalos et al., 2012). An incubation experiment confirmed that the
efficacy of the inhibitor to abate N2O emissions is realized under
conditions of low soil moisture (WFPS

55%) (Sanz-Cobena et al.,
2016), common in Mediterranean semi-arid areas due to the scarce
rainfall. The efficiency of UIs is expected to be highest in alkaline
soils (frequent in Mediterranean climates), and is also generally
higher in coarse-textured soils and at high N fertilization rates
(Abalos et al., 2014a).
A cost-benefit analysis showed that mitigated N due to
reductions in NH3 volatilization when UIs are employed may
serve to reduce fertilizer-N rates without incurring yield penalties
(Sutton et al., 2015) (Table 1). The N rate reduction would decrease
total fertilizer costs and partially offset the higher cost of urea
treated with UIs. Further, reduced N rates may have additional
environmental benefits such as reduction in NO3
-leaching.
However, such
findings were obtained from studies in temperate
climate, and remain to be confirmed under Mediterranean
conditions.
2.1.2. Irrigation technology
Soil moisture, expressed as WFPS, is a key factor affecting N2O
losses (del Prado et al., 2006; García-Marco et al., 2014), hence the
potential for N2O mitigation linked to irrigation technologies is
high (even above 50%) (e.g., Sánchez-Martín et al., 2008, 2010a;
Guardia et al., 2016) (Table 1). The lower amounts of water applied
in subsurface drip irrigation (SDI) or normal/superficial drip
irrigation (DI) through more frequent irrigation events, generate
“dry” and “wet” areas in the soil, lowering the overall soil moisture
and favoring nitrification over denitrification (Sánchez-Martín
et al., 2010a), thus reducing N2O emissions (Table 1). Drip irrigation
systems have shown an N2O EF of only 0.18%, compared to an EF of
1% in sprinkler systems (SI), showing the mitigation potential of
irrigation technologies in the Mediterranean region (Cayuela et al.,
2017).
Optimized irrigation techniques to decrease GHG emissions on
Mediterranean regions are particularly used in perennial crops and
intensive vegetable cropping systems (SDI, DI), and in paddy soils
(water table management).
Subsurface drip irrigation has been shown to be beneficial in
terms of increased yield, improved crop quality, and reduced
agronomic costs (e.g., for weed control or water applied) (Ayars
et al., 2015), but there are some technical and economic
constraints associated with conversion, automation and mainte-
nance. Indeed, the use of different irrigation systems results in
distinct water use patterns. This is particularly important in
Mediterranean systems, where irrigation needs to be optimized,
due to limited water resources during summer crop growth
periods. The most efficient irrigation system from the water use
perspective is subsurface drip irrigation (SDI), followed by
normal/superficial drip irrigation (DI) and sprinkler (SI). In
contrast, whereas furrow irrigation (FI) results in the highest
water consumption rates, thus coincident with N2O mitigation
technology.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 9
2.1.3. Fertigation
Irrigation combined with split application of N fertilizerdissolved
intheirrigationwater(i.e.,fertigation)isideallysuitedforcontrolling
the placement, time and rate of fertilizer N application, thereby
increasing N use efficiency. This fertilization strategy is highly
relevant in a context of increasing drought periods due to climate
change in Mediterranean agro-ecosystems (Abalos et al., 2014b).
Reductions in direct N2O emissions between 30 and 50% compared
with traditional fertilization and irrigation practices have been
reported for Mediterranean fertigated crops, mostly due to an effect
on nitrification rates (Kallenbach et al., 2010; Schellenberg et al.,
2012; Kennedy et al., 2013; Abalos et al., 2014b; Vallejo et al., 2014)
Table 2
Constraints to management practice change.
Agronomic
Measures
Ove-rall
(1)
Constraints References
Technical Economic Social (2) Environmental (3)
Adjust N
fertilization
to crop
needs
Low Soil analysis needed
to adjust dosage.
Need to know
adjusted crop
requirements
Potential increase
in labor costs (e.g.
split application)
and soil analysis
Perception of decreased
productivity
N.A. Aizpurua et al. (2010); Sánchez et al. (2016);
SmartSOIL (2015)
Substitute
synthetic
fertilizers
by manures
and slurries
Medium Need to know
adjusted crop
requirements
Need of adequate
equipment (for
incorporation of
slurries)
Transport and
application costs
New equipment
Legal restrictions (EU
Nitrates Directive 91/676/
EEC) – (i.e., use,
management, treatment and
transportation)
Bad smells
Only applicable to areas with
mixed farming systems
Perception of decreased
productivity
Potential pollution
and health issues
Abalos et al. (2013); Berenguer et al. (2008);
Cantero-Martínez et al. (2007); Cole et al.
(2000); Díaz-Cruz (2003); Feilberg et al.
(2011); Küçükdogan et al. (2015); Sánchez
et al. (2014)
Fertigation &
improved
irrigation
technology
High New infrastructure
associated with
conversion
Maintenance
difficulties
(fertigation)
Initial expensive
investment costs
Not for all crops Potential
accumulation of
heavy metals in
crops (i.e., rice)
Ayars et al. (2015); Kennedy et al. (2013);
Pereira et al. (2002); Thompson et al. (2000)
Nitrification &
Urease
inhib.
High N.A. Increase of
fertilization costs
Not widely spread among
neighboring farmers
N.A. Abalos et al. (2014a); Linzmeier et al. (2001);
Timilsena et al. (2015)
Biochar Low Lack of experiments
at local conditions
Expensive product
(2$ per kilo)
Lack of knowledge on how to
produce it on-site; Lack of
regulations
N.A. Hussain et al. (2016)
Composted
sewage
sludge
High Access/availability
to/of materials
Transport and
management
Specific knowledge required
to adjust rates to crop
requirements and pollution
targets
Legal restrictions (i.e.,
Council Directive 86/278/
EEC (CEC, 1986); Landfill
Directive 99/31/EC (CEC,
1999))
Bad smells and negative
image in some areas.
Pollution issues,
sanitary problems
(antibiotics) and
increase in soil
salinity
Klee et al. (2004); Threedeach et al. (2012)
Crop residues
& agroindustry
byproducts
Medium Access/availability
to/of materials
Initial investment
cost (machinery)
Loss of revenue
from straw sales
Specific knowledge required
(compost)
Regulation of rates
Strong traditions avoiding
the use of by-products
(other uses)
Risk of
fire (from
residues)
Sanitary problems
(by-products)
Aguilera et al. (2015a); Giacomo and Taglieri,
2009; Spinelli and Picchi, (2010); Luna et al.
(2012); Sánchez et al. (2016)
Low/no tillage Low Possible weeds and
compaction
problems
Initial investment,
income loss at
short-term, cost
on machinery
Need of herbicide
Training and advisory
support
Strong traditions of
conventional farmers
Reluctance from sales
technicians
Potential pollution
(herbicides)
Annett et al. (2014); Ingram et al. (2014);
Sánchez et al. (2014, 2016); Sánchez-Girón
et al. (2004); SmartSOIL (2015)
Cover crops Low Higher requirements
on planning
Limited under water
scarcity (i.e., water or
nutrients
competition)
Extra sowing and
killing costs
associated to the
cover crop
Lack of training (e.g, species
selection, residue
management, kill date)
Strong traditions of
conventional farmers
N.A. Alonso-Ayuso et al. (2014); Gabriel et al.
(2012); Ingram et al. (2014); Sanz-Cobena
et al. (2014a); Sánchez et al. (2014, 2016);
SmartSOIL (2015)
Crop
Rotations
Low Higher requirements
on planning and
advice
Loss of market
opportunities
Lack of training on selecting
crop species and sequences
or weed control
N.A. Ingram et al. (2014); Sánchez et al. (2014,
2016); SmartSOIL (2015)
(1) Overall constraints assessment. This has been determined by assessing all specific constraints in an expert judgement analysis; (2) Legal and behavioural; (3) Pollution and
sanitary; N.A.: low or non-existing constraints.
10 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
(Table 1). Since this is a relatively new methodology, there could be
initial economic barriers associated with conversion from furrow or
sprinkler (Table 2). Technical and economic barriers associated with
maintenance may also exist; a problem that automation may
partially overcome, easing irrigation and fertilization activities
(Thompson et al., 2000). Conversely, fertigation may serve to reduce
costs due to input savings (e.g., water, fertilizers) and increases in
cropqualityand productivity(Kennedyetal.,2013;Ayarsetal.,2015).
2.2. Agronomic practices affecting CH4 emissions
Mediterranean agricultural soils produce large CH4 emissions in
flooded crops (e.g. rice) through methanogenesis, representing 6%
of all CH4 production from agricultural sources. Water table
management has been proven to significantly reduce CH4 losses in
non-Mediterranean climates (Yagi et al., 1997; Kudo et al., 2014;
Liang et al., 2016). By decreasing the
flooding period, both
methanogenesis and CH4 evasion through the water table, one
of the CH4 transport pathways, are limited. This leads to lower
emissions and reduces water consumption, a crucial goal to
improve the sustainability of Mediterranean agro-ecosystems
(Rizzo et al., 2013, 2015) (Table 1).
Methane emissions also depend on the incorporation of organic
matter (mainly crop residues). Increases in CH4 emissions from rice
production were reported when straw was added from 0 up to
7 t N ha1 in a Mediterranean cropping system (CH4 emission
ranging from c. 100 to c. 500 kg CH4 ha1 yr1; Sanchis et al., 2012)
(Table 1).
With regard to rice straw management strategies, recom-
mended practices for enhancing GHG mitigation are composting
rice straw, straw burning under controlled conditions, recollecting
rice straw for biochar production, generation of energy, using it as a
substrate, or source of other by-products with added value.
In non-flooded Mediterranean systems, the effect of fertilizer
application rate on soil CH4 uptake has been found to be positive
(Meijide et al., 2017), negative (Guardia et al., 2016) or neutral
(Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2014b). Variable effects, depending on organic
or synthetic fertilizers on CH4 sink capacity, were reported by
Sánchez-Martín et al. (2010b). The lower CH4 uptake following the
application of high C-content amendments has been related to
changes in soil porosity and enhancement of soil respiration rates,
promoting anaerobic microsites and consequently reducing
methanotrophy (Le Mer and Roger, 2001).
2.3. Agronomic practices affecting C sequestration
Levels of OM in Mediterranean soils are generally low and are
expected to decrease further in many Mediterranean areas in the
coming years (Davidson and Janssens, 2006) as a result of
generalized low C inputs and increased soil organic carbon
(SOC) decomposition rates associated with rising temperatures
(e.g., Al-Adamat et al., 2007) thus increasing the GWP of
Mediterranean agro-ecosystems.
Management practices aimed at increasing SOC stocks must
target a positive balance between C inputs and outputs through the
reduction of SOC losses (Powlson et al., 2011; Plaza-Bonilla et al.,
2016), the increase of organic C inputs into the soil, or both
(Aguilera et al., 2013a; Six et al., 2004). Most practices leading to
increasing SOC content include reduced soil tillage, careful
management of crop residues and agroindustry products in
herbaceous crops, and cover cropping in orchards. These practices
have relevant co-benefits through improved soil physical, chemical
and biological quality (Lal, 2011; Lassaletta and Aguilera, 2015),
enhanced crop productivity, reduced dependence on external
inputs (Smith and Olesen, 2010) and lower soil erosion rates.
2.3.1. Reduced soil tillage
Reduction or complete cessation of tillage decreases the direct
incorporation of fresh organic debris into deeper soil layers. The
absence of tillage (NT) slows down aggregate turnover and, in turn,
increases the physical stabilization of SOC within soil aggregates
(Álvaro-Fuentes et al., 2008; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2010). An
approximate annual increase of 1% in SOC when tillage is avoided
in Mediterranean croplands has been observed (own estimation
from Aguilera et al., 2013a). This is above the 0.4% targets of recent
initiatives for sustainable soil conservation (http://4p1000.org).
The response under reduced tillage (RT) was variable and of similar
magnitude, with average accrual rates of 0.32–0.47 Mg C ha1 yr1
compared to conventional tillage management (CT) (Sánchez et al.,
2016). In semiarid conditions (400 mm of total rainfall), Guardia
et al. (2016) indicated that NT
fixed 0.5 Mg C ha1 yr1, whereas
0.06 Mg C ha1 yr1 was accumulated in the soil under RT
practices. Estimates are highly dependent on the soil depth used
for the calculation, since vertical SOC distribution in NT and CT
systems is different (Cantero-Martínez et al., 2007). Further, the
assumption of a steady and linear C sequestration may not hold
true, because the annual C accumulation rate tends to decrease in
the long-term (Álvaro-Fuentes et al., 2014).
No-tillage practices are more commonly used in rain-fed
systems; but they are also suitable for irrigated (although RT is
more recommended in these systems), extensive, intensive and
organic systems with well-drained soils. In water-limited regions,
such as dryland Mediterranean areas, NT enhances soil water
retention potential, and has a positive effect on biomass
production and crop residue inputs (Lampurlanés et al., 2016).
The greater soil water retention potential under NT is the result of
reduced evaporation due to the mulch protection, and enhanced
soil water infiltration due to the higher structural stability at the
soil surface.
The reduction or cessation of tillage requires specific management
according to the climatic zone (SmartSOIL, 2015). Reduced
tillage is an accepted practice by an increasing proportion of
farmers, although initial investment cost for specific seeding
machinery can constrain farmers’ willingness to adopt RT or NT
(Table 2). It usually leads to net cost reductions, despite the initial
investment (Sánchez-Girón et al., 2004) since farmers save labor
time and fuel inputs compared to conventional tillage (Álvaro-
Fuentes et al., 2014; Sánchez et al., 2014, 2016; SmartSOIL, 2015;
Guardia et al., 2016). Even so, NT practices need to be accompanied
by the application of herbicides, which may increase costs and
produce pollution in soil and water bodies if improperly managed
(Annett et al., 2014). Efforts are being made to promote NT
practices with decreased use of phytochemicals (e.g. Sans et al.,
2011; Armengot et al., 2015).
2.3.2. Crop rotations and cover crops
Long crop rotations have been proposed in rain-fed Mediterra-
nean cropping systems to enhance C sequestration and restore soil
fertility and structure (Benlhabib et al., 2014). The effect of crop
rotations on C sequestration is highly dependent on time with no
significant effect reported in short-term studies (López-Bellido
et al., 1997; Hernanz et al., 2002; Martin-Rueda et al., 2007).
However, positive effects in long-term experiments (>15 years)
could appear if crop biomass is properly managed after harvest
(Masri and Ryan, 2006; López-Bellido et al., 2010; Martiniello and
Teixeira da Silva, 2011). For instance, a wheat-chickpea crop
rotation under CT, showed a C sequestration rate of 0.53 Mg C
ha1 y1 during a 20-year period, compared with wheat monoculture
(López-Bellido et al., 2010). The effect of crop rotations on SOC
stocks is also dependent on the type of crops included in the
rotation (Triberti et al., 2016) and the management of crop residue.
The introduction of perennial crops to rotations has shown benefits
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 11
for SOC stock and soil quality (Di Bene et al., 2011; Pellegrino et al.,
2011). The substitution of bare fallows by any crop (usually used to
improve water and nutrient availability for the following crop) has
been associated with SOC stabilization in NT systems (Álvaro-
Fuentes et al., 2009), and to reduced soil erosion (Boellstorff and
Benito, 2005). The effect on C sequestration of the inclusion of
grain legumes in rain-fed yearly rotations is dubious, due to their
low biomass production, although their conversion to stabilized
soil organic matter could be more efficient than that of cereals
(Carranca et al., 2009). Consequently, the highest potential of
fallow and legumes for mitigating GHG from these types of
cropping systems comes from the avoidance of fertilizer production
emissions.
Implementing crop rotations requires more detailed planning
compared to monocultures (e.g., selecting crop species/sequences
and nutrient and weed control practices), which can constitute a
management constraint. On the other hand, reduction of fertilizer,
pesticide and herbicide needs, and possible crop yield and soil
quality improvements in the long term, added to the low
investment and operational costs to implement the practice,
may encourage farmers to establish this traditional crop management
practice (Ferrio et al., 2007). Moreover, some legume species
and cultivars (e.g., green beans, peas, etc.) can represent high-value
crops, particularly in vegetable crop rotations. In forage cropping
systems, leguminous species can improve the forage quality and
therefore the economic profit (Rochon et al., 2004; Kala9c, 2012).
Crop rotations (particularly those which involve legumes) are
included in the greening requirements of the European Union
Common Agricultural Policy (EU CAP) incentives (crop diversification),
thus encouraging implementation among farmers (Ingram
et al., 2014).
Cover cropping (CC) in herbaceous cropping systems involves
the use of catch crops or green manures during the intercrop
period of irrigated cropping systems (intra-annual rotation) or
substituting bare fallows in rain-fed cropping systems (inter-
annual rotation). In fruit orchards, CC involves the use of
understory vegetation between tree rows or in the whole soil
surface. Catch crops are intended to reduce nutrient losses in soils
that are prone to greater N leaching losses (e.g. sandy or highly
fertilized soils). In terms of C sequestration, the use of CC has been
proposed as a mean to enhance SOM and labile C pools by
incorporating plant material into the soil (Veenstra et al., 2007).
Average C sequestration potential of winter CCs (cultivated in the
intercrop period of summer crops) has been reported at 0.32

0.08
Mg C ha1 y1 at the global level (Poeplau and Don, 2015). For
Mediterranean areas, González-Sánchez et al. (2012) studied cover
crops in woody cropping systems of Spain, reporting average C
sequestration rates of 1.54 and 0.35 Mg C ha1 y1 in studies of less
and more than 10 years, respectively, while Aguilera et al. (2013a)
calculated an average carbon sequestration rate of 0.27 Mg C ha1
y1 for all types of cover crops in a meta-analysis of Mediterranean
cropping systems.
Application of CCs is limited during seasons with water scarcity.
General lack of knowledge of the best CC management practices for
optimizing both environmental and economic profits limits the
correct implementation of CC. Selection of plant species, the
management of residues and the kill date are crucial factors
(Gabriel et al., 2012; Alonso-Ayuso et al., 2014; Sanz-Cobena et al.,
2014a) likely influencing the yields and N uptake efficiency of the
succeeding cash crop (Miguez and Bollero, 2005; Tonitto et al.,
2006). Reduction of fertilizers required for the subsequent crop,
(especially when grain legumes are used as green manure), and
gain of secondary products (e.g., animal feed) can deliver positive
economic benefits (Gabriel et al., 2012); usually outcompeting
sowing and killing costs (Table 2). Furthermore, CCs prevent soil
erosion, runoff and sediment losses (Blanco-Canqui et al., 2015),
improve soil structure, N supply and water retention capacity
(Quemada and Cabrera, 2002; Suddick et al., 2010), reduce leaching
(Bugg et al., 2007), improve soil microbial quality (Balota et al.,
2014) and reduce soil salinity during the early stages of the cash
crop (Gabriel et al., 2012).
2.3.3. Management of crop residues and agroindustry by-products
Estimating the GHG mitigation potential of using crop residues
and organic by-products from agroindustry in Mediterranean areas
implies accounting the net GHG balance when they are used as: (i)
soil amendments to improve SOM and enhance SOC sequestration
(Aguilera et al., 2013a), (ii) feedstock for bioenergy production (e.g.
Di Giacomo and Taglieri, 2009; Spinelli and Picchi, 2010), (iii) cosubstrate
for composting (e.g. Santos et al., 2016), (iv) feed for
livestock (e.g. Molina-Alcaide and Yáñez-Ruiz, 2008) or (v)
construction materials (e.g. animal beds, buildings). Also, we
must have a realistic estimate of the current fate of these organic
matter streams and the sustainability or economic issues (Pardo
et al., 2013) that may jeopardize the realization of such potential.
To our knowledge no such study has been made for the whole
Mediterranean area. Pardo et al. (2017), estimated for the
Mediterranean coastal areas in Spain reductions of 4.3 Tg CO2eq
yr1 (about 11% of total agricultural emissions in Spain in 2014) if
available local by-products from agri-food industries was codigested
with existing manure and applied to the nearby available
agricultural soils. This study suggests that, despite the overall large
stocking of crop-residues and by-products in the Mediterranean
basin (FAOStat, 2016), the potential for their use in cropping
systems may be reduced by its availability nearby.
The potential to increase SOC levels by using agroindustry by-
products, as in crop residues, depends on their composition and
degradability. However, agroindustry by-products vary widely in
their chemical composition and therefore in their degradation
rates. For example, olive and mill waste as they have very low
degradation rate in the soil have been found to be good
amendments to increase SOC when applied to the soil (Saviozzi
et al., 2001).
Besides the potential direct GHG reduction that any strategy
involving the return of the crop residues and agroindustry by-
products to the soil may cause, (e.g., Kassam et al., 2012,; Aguilera
et al., 2013a; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2015) applying these materials,
treated or un-treated, as soil amendments can also deliver
environmental co-benefits, such as erosion reduction when they
as raw are used for mulching (Blavet et al., 2009; Jordán et al., 2010)
or, in general, allowing closing the nutrient cycles, with associated
potential reductions of fertilizer use and reductions in the draught
force and fuel consumption for soil tillage (Peltre et al., 2015).
Trade-offs, however, may occur with some of the strategies that
may results in larger GHG mitigation potential. For example, the
use of crop residues on the soil surface might pose a risk of
fire in
some Mediterranean areas (Luna et al., 2012) and, sanitary,
pollution and legal constraints may apply, especially if the by-
product is applied to crops e.g. fresh vegetables without pre-
treatment (Table 2).
Composting and anaerobic digestion of agroindustry by-
products are common treatments that can improve the properties
of the organic matter and can also provide additional overall GHG
reductions (del Prado et al., 2013). The composting process has
relatively low associated GHG emissions (Pardo et al., 2015) and
can lead to moderate to high SOC sequestration rates when used as
soil amendments (Aguilera et al., 2013a). Long term humic-clay
associations promote a more efficient protection of SOM and longlasting
C sequestration in amended soils. The composted material
will lower the soil pH, reducing the decarbonation process in soils
developed over calcareous materials (common in the Mediterra-
nean basin). Anaerobic digestion of agro-industry by-products
12 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
reduces overall GHG emissions through the generation of biogas.
The conversion of OM into biogas (i.e., CO2 and CH4) involves a
fraction of C that is released to the atmosphere, instead of being
applied to the land. Therefore, although digestate application
increases soil C storage and produces benefits over soil quality in
the long term, the potential for C sequestration (per unit of initial
residue amount) could be lower when compared with undigested
materials. On the other hand, the high nutrient availability of
anaerobically digested organic wastes makes digestate an economically
viable substitute of mineral fertilizer (Arthurson, 2009).
Sewage sludge is currently applied to agroecosystems, especially
to degraded soils of Mediterranean areas (Albiach et al.,
2001; Fernández et al., 2009) due to its high OM. However, the
labile OM forms present in sewage sludge and the high amounts
usually applied (Franco-Otero et al., 2012) may increase CO2
emissions due to increased soil respiration (Flavel et al., 2005; Song
and Lee, 2010). Sludge use is highly constrained by fresh water
pollution and availability issues. It is likely that increasing social
and political environmental concerns, reflected in national and
international normative, will further extend the use of wastewater
treatment systems thus increasing sludge production. In this
context, the EU Landfill Directive 99/31/EC (CEC, 1999) banning the
landfilling of sewage sludge (Klee et al., 2004) should lead to a
better reuse of sewage sludge, thus reconnecting urban and rural
environments and ensuring the absence of risks for both the
society and the environment. In this sense, further studies are
needed to assess the impact of sewage sludge on (e.g.) antibiotic
resistance in soil microbiota (Chen et al., 2016).
Biochar (a solid by-product generated by pyrolysis) application
to soils has been suggested as a means of reducing atmospheric
CO2 concentration. Biochar's climate change-mitigation potential
relies on its highly recalcitrant nature, which decreases the rate at
which vegetation C is released to the atmosphere (Woolf et al.,
2010). Biochar's mitigation potential depends on production
process, and further experimental assessments of its efficiency
under Mediterranean conditions are required (Hussain et al.,
2016).
3. Side-effects associated to selected GHG mitigation practices
3.1. GHG emissions
Specific management practices primarily target the mitigation
of a single GHG (e.g. decreased soil tillage aimed at increased soil
CO2 sequestration) may promote the release (trade-off) or
mitigation (win-win) of other GHGs (e.g. N2O or CH4).
Enhanced direct N2O emissions have been observed after NT in
the short-term (Six et al., 2004), especially in poorly drained soils
(Rochette, 2008). On the long term, increased soil porosity in NT
systems, counterbalances the greater WFPS levels typically found
in NT compared to tilled soils (Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2013a,b; Kessel
et al., 2013). Conversely, NT can reduce indirect N2O emissions due
to lower runoff and N leaching (Holland, 2004; Soane et al., 2012).
In the case of crop rotations with bare fallow (BF), Sánchez-
Martín et al. (2010b) showed negative N2O
fluxes in a fallow period
between two irrigated onion crops under Mediterranean conditions.
Under similar climatic conditions but in a rain-fed crop,
Tellez-Rio et al. (2015) observed lower N2O emissions from a wheat
crop preceded by a fallow period than from a monocrop of the
same cereal.
For crop rotations including CCs, the effect on N2O emissions
needs to be assessed by differentiating the intercrop and the cash
crop periods. During the intercrop, contrasting results have been
obtained. The meta-analysis of Basche et al. (2014) pointed out an
overall enhancement of N2O losses, particularly in the case of
legume-CCs. These results were supported by Guardia et al. (2016)
in a
field experiment in Mediterranean conditions. Conversely,
during the subsequent cash crop period, CCs as opposed to BF have
potential to decrease N2O emissions due to the lower requirement
of N fertilizers. The same authors showed that synthetic N applied
to a maize crop preceded by vetch (a legume) could be decreased
by 25% without yield penalties. However, also under Mediterra-
nean conditions, neither Sanz-Cobena et al. (2014a) nor Guardia
et al. (2016) observed a significant effect of catch crop management
on N2O emissions when considering the whole crop and intercrop
cycles. Since the effect of CCs on direct N2O losses is negligible
(particularly when considering the whole cropping cycle and
integrated fertilization management) CCs mainly reduce indirect
N2O emissions associated with N leaching (Gabriel et al., 2012;
Quemada et al., 2013). In any case, both BF and the use of legumes
in yearly rotations decrease the GHG emissions from N fertilizer
manufacturing, making crop operations (e.g., machinery, agrochemicals
manufacturing, etc.) the main source of GHG emissions
in these systems (Aguilera et al., 2015a; Guardia et al., 2016).
Biochar has attracted attention as a strategy for mitigating N2O
emissions from agricultural soils, along with the initial concept of
increasing SOC stocks. Biochar was found to decrease N2O
emissions by close to 50% (Cayuela et al., 2015), with soils from
Mediterranean origin showing variable but large mitigation
potential, up to 90% according to lab studies of wood biochar
(Cayuela et al., 2013). However,
field studies under Mediterranean
conditions have shown small to no significant reductions (Castaldi
et al., 2011; Suddick and Six, 2013; Pereira et al., 2015), or even a
slight increase in N2O emissions (Sánchez-García et al., 2016).
These different outputs between lab and
field studies were
probably due to the fact that laboratory conditions were not
finally reflected on the
field (Cayuela et al., 2014), and suggests that
further experiments using a range of soil types, crops (absence of
perennial and horticultural crops) and management practices is
required. The effectiveness of biochar to significantly decrease N2O
emissions depends on the soil type (Sánchez-García et al., 2014),
the N fertilizer used (Nelissen et al., 2014) and, ultimately, on the
main pathways leading to N2O formation (nitrification vs.
denitrification). Biochar from woody materials (low C/N ratios)
produced by slow pyrolysis at high temperatures (>500 C; molar
H:Corg < 0.3) have shown the highest mitigation potential
(Cayuela et al., 2014, 2015).
3.2. Non-GHG emissions
Ammonia volatilization, nitric oxide (NO) and NO3
 leaching
are the main pathways of non-GHG pollutant release to the
environment from Mediterranean agricultural soils. Whereas NO
contributes to the formation of ozone, and influences air quality,
both NH3 and NO3
 losses also indirectly affect emissions of N2O
(IPCC, 2006).
In rain-fed systems, NO3
 leaching normally occurs in autumn
and is mostly driven by episodic precipitation events and external
N inputs. In irrigated systems, N losses through leaching occur in
summer due to high irrigation and N fertilization rates. Ammonia
emissions are common in both rain-fed and irrigated cropping soils
if urea and ammonium-based fertilized are applied to the soil
surface.
Adjusting N fertilization rates to crop needs may have positive
side-effects on the abatement of both NH3 volatilization and NO3

leaching (Quemada et al., 2013; Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b). The use
of solid manure can lower N losses through reduced leaching
(Sánchez-Martín et al., 2010a) and N2O emissions (Meijide et al.,
2007, 2009), due to enhanced microbial and plant immobilization
of N (Table 1). The application of liquid manure (slurries) can
improve soil structure, decreasing the risk of N leaching in the
medium term (Zavattaro et al., 2012; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2013a,b),
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 13
although it can increase it in the short term when applied at high
rates (Yagüe and Quílez, 2015).
Manure application in the
field can trigger NH3 volatilization
(e.g. Sanz et al., 2010; Viguria et al., 2015) if no NH3-abatement
strategies are applied (Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b). Slurry injection
technologies have been shown to reduce NH3 emission by 40–90%
compared with broadcast application (Webb et al., 2010).
However, this may leave more mineral N available to be lost in
the form of e.g., NO3
 and N2O if soil conditions favor
denitrification (high WFPS) (Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b). On
well-drained arable soils, injection can reduce N losses, as it
reduces NH3 volatilization while it has little effect on N2O
emission rates. In Mediterranean agriculture, slurry injection is
still a marginal practice, but may have a great potential for NH3
abatement without compromising N2O mitigation due to dry soil
conditions that are unfavorable for denitrification. Immediate
incorporation of manure (pig, cattle and poultry manure) into the
soil by ploughing may reduce up to 90% of NH3 compared with no
ploughing (Webb et al., 2010). Ammonia abatement will decrease
to 50% if soil incorporation is delayed for some hours (Dell et al.,
2012), or incorporation systems other than ploughing are used
(e.g., discs, tines; Thompson et al., 2000). Fertilizer injections and
tilling within the
first 24 h after application are not popular
among farmers because of the additional costs and technical
difficulties associated.
In the case of digested agroindustry by-products, the increase in
NH4
+ associated with the transformation process improves
fertilizer potential, but may also enhance N emissions through
NH3 volatilization. The
final effect on direct and indirect NO
emissions will be determined by the complex interactions involved
in the soil-plant system, which are influenced by the composition
of the organic amendment, but are tightly controlled by the soil
conditions (e.g. water content, temperature) and the time and
method of application (Thorman et al., 2007). Similarly, for sewage
sludge applied to croplands as soil amendments, large amounts of
N in NH4
+ form may be released, providing a substrate for
nitrification (Kleber et al., 2000) and thus increasing NO emissions
(Roelle and Aneja, 2002). Techniques to stabilize sludge improve
the soil retention of organic C (Dere and Stehouwer, 2011) and
reduce the risk of N leaching due to the low proportion of available
N (15–20%). In contrast, thermal-drying of sludge causes an
increase in easily-mineralizable organic N (Tarrasón et al., 2008),
with readily plant-available NH4
+ of up to 85% (Gendebien et al.,
2008). This may lead to, not only to higher GHG emissions due to
enhanced activity of nitrifiers and denitrifiers, increasing risk of
NH3 volatilization.
The inclusion of a NI with any NH4
+-based N fertilizer will retain
N in the soil in the form of NH4
+, thus reducing potential losses by
NO3
 leaching (Quemada et al., 2013). By inhibiting nitrification,
NIs can also mitigate NO emissions (Qiao et al., 2015; Guardia et al.,
2016). The expected increase on NH4
+ in the upper soil associated
with the use of NIs may increase the risk of NH3 volatilization if
environmental and weather conditions are favorable for this
process and the fertilizer is applied to the soil surface. On the other
hand, the production and transport of inhibitors may increase
emissions of CO2. Reductions in NH3 volatilization induced by UIs
may increase soil mineral N prone to be lost as NO3
 leaching,
which would eventually increase indirect N2O emissions. However,
the few
field investigations carried out under Mediterranean
conditions have not shown any significant UI effect on N leaching
(e.g., Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012).
Improved irrigation techniques have been shown to reduce
NO3
 leaching (Quemada et al., 2013) as a result of lower soil
moisture and a lower proportion of wet soil surface, but may
potentially increase NO emissions (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2010a).
In the case of fertigated soils, indirect N2O emissions from leached
NO3
 would be reduced due to lower irrigation rates and higher
irrigation frequency (avoiding deep percolation), as well as better
synchronization between N supply and plant N needs (Quemada
et al., 2013).
3.3. Crop yields
Adjusting N fertilization rates to crop needs, if properly done,
does not have negative effects on crop yields (Yagüe and Quílez,
2010), but only on reduced N losses. Similarly, the use of organic
amendments instead of synthetic fertilizers does not have a
negative effect on crop yields per se. As occurring with synthetic
fertilizers, applying solid manures only as N fertilizer could
decrease yields if N application rates (and/or timing) are not
precisely adjusted to crop requirements (Abalos et al., 2013)
(Table 1). This may result in an effective mitigation per surface area
but the yield-scaled N2O emissions could increase.
Solid manures are usually applied in combination with
synthetic fertilizers or liquid manures to achieve adequate N
application rates. For slurries, increases in cereal yields have been
reported, presumably due to a more balanced nutrition (Plaza-
Bonilla et al., 2014a). However, in more productive areas (e.g.
irrigated or sub-humid) and high-yielding crops (e.g. maize)
farmers tend to complement slurry application with synthetic
fertilizer as a top-dressing application (Bosch-Serra et al., 2015).
The use of urease or nitrification inhibitors in combination with
synthetic fertilizers has shown slightly positive or negligible
effects on crop yields (Abalos et al., 2013). No significant effect of 3,
4-dimethyl pyrazole phosphate (DMPP) on crop yields has been
measured, while increases in yields (5–10%) have been measured
when using DCD (Vallejo et al., 2005; Abalos et al., 2014a; Huérfano
et al., 2015).
Diversified crop rotations have shown to improve yields (López-
Fando and Almendros, 1995; López-Bellido et al., 2000) (Table 1).
On the contrary, the presence of BF in rotations is usually
associated with decreased SOC contents (Álvaro-Fuentes et al.,
2008; Ryan et al., 2009) enhancing the cropping system GWP, but
also affecting soil fertility and the yield-scaled GHG budget. The
benefits on crop yield and direct N2O emissions (considering the
whole intercrop-cash crop cycle) are enhanced when using legume
CCs (Tonitto et al., 2006; Quemada et al., 2013; Doltra and Olesen,
2013) but there may be drawbacks for direct mitigation of N2O
emissions during the intercrop period (Basche et al., 2014; Guardia
et al., 2016), as well as for preventing N leaching. Further research
should analyze these trade-offs in the short- and long-term,
considering both direct and indirect N2O and other GHG emissions.
In the case of soil management practices, although highly
dependent on pedoclimatic conditions, increases up to 20% in
yields have been reported in Mediterranean environments under
reduced tillage (Cantero-Martínez et al., 2007; Pittelkow et al.,
2014) with some exceptions (Pittelkow et al., 2014).
4. Effect of agricultural practices on the total GHG budget of
rain-fed and irrigated cropping systems
The main management practices affecting C sequestration, N2O
and CH4 emissions have been discussed, so the most promising
measures can be selected, considering the overall GHG balance in
each specific Mediterranean agro-ecosystem (Table 3). The
dominant GHG sources of each cropping system and each
particular area (local pedoclimatic conditions) should be considered
for prioritizing the adoption of efficient techniques, but also
taking into account all practices that could provide an optimum
balance between GHG mitigation and crop yields while saving/
maintaining farm expenses or leading to an efficient use of
available resources.
14 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
The study of Aguilera et al. (2015a) pointed out that the main
GHG sources in herbaceous cropping systems in Mediterranean
areas were emissions from machinery due to the low direct GHG
emissions in these systems. Guardia et al. (2016), in a non-irrigated
cereal-legume rotation, also confirmed that the relative weight of
N2O losses was lower than that of farm inputs and operations,
while C sequestration was the main GHG component under NT
adoption. Despite some uncertainties and variability that could be
attributed to the C sink (e.g., the depth considered for calculation,
the decrease of annual sequestration rate in the long term) (Álvaro-
Fuentes et al., 2014), it appears that practices such as NT/RT
combined with crop rotations including legumes and cover crops,
without removal of crop residues, are the most promising for
minimizing fuel consumption and external inputs (e.g. conserva-
tion agriculture practices, as conventional ones, might rely on the
use of pesticides), and promote C sequestration (Table 3). These
practices may provide the best GHG balance in rain-fed
Mediterranean herbaceous crops, without negative side-effects
on crop yields or N losses. Adjusting N rates to crop needs may
improve the GHG balance of rain-fed herbaceous cropping systems
through two components (N2O emissions and CO2 equivalents
from production and transport of fertilizers) while reducing costs,
so this practice should be encouraged in Mediterranean areas.
In summer irrigated crops, high N2O losses can occur (Aguilera
et al., 2013b). Consequently, agricultural practices based on an
improved management of irrigation water (e.g., drip irrigation), N
fertilization (e.g., adjusting N rates and timing, use of nitrification
inhibitors) and both (e.g., fertigation) are the most promising
measures in these agro-ecosystems. Since fruit orchards are
broadly characterized by efficient water and fertilizer use (e.g.,
drip irrigation and drip-fertigation), other promising techniques
are cover cropping (thus minimizing fuel consumption) and
pruning-residue management for enhancing C stocks (Aguilera
et al., 2015b).
Methane emissions are the main component of the GHG budget
of paddy
fields (Aguilera et al., 2015a), so mitigation efforts should
focus on water management for minimizing these losses (see
Section 2.1). Reducing water consumption in vegetable cropping
systems may lead to substantial GHG emission reductions
(Aguilera et al., 2015a).
5. Socioeconomic performance of agronomic measures and
constraints to implementation
The degree of implementation of agronomic strategies pro-
posed in this review differs among countries under Mediterranean
climatic conditions. Even so, management strategies based on
farmers’ practices (e.g. crop rotations, cover cropping, etc.) are
widespread, but there is room for increasing their application.
Adoption of conservation agriculture (CA) practices (i.e.
coincidence in time and space of i) reduced tillage,
25%, or notillage;
ii) >30% of soil cover, with mulch materials or living crops
including CCs; and iii) crop rotations or associations) (FAO, 2011a,
2011b) in dry Mediterranean cropping systems has been reported
by Kassam et al. (2012). According to this study, CA practices are
implemented in 72 million ha (14% of the total cropland with this
climatic regime). Outside the Mediterranean basin, where
adoption of CA practices is still modest (c. average of 3% over
total arable land) (Lahmar, 2010; Kassam et al., 2012), there are
several countries and regions showing successful adoption of CA.
These include the USA (16% of total cropland under no-tillage)
(Kassam et al., 2012), central Chile (30% of rain-fed systems growth
under CA practices) (Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009), South Africa
and south Western Australia (CA adopted by 90% of farmers)
(Llewellyn et al., 2009). In Mediterranean Europe, Spain is the
country with the largest cropping surface under CA (650,000 ha, 5%
of cropland, and 1,218,726 ha of perennial trees – mostly olives and
grapes – in combination with CCs) (MERMA, 2010; González-
Sánchez et al., 2015). In North and South African areas under
Mediterranean conditions, the implementation of CA is, to date,
sparse (Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009; FAO, 2011a, 2011b). Even so,
cereal-based CA systems of Mediterranean regions of northern
Africa and Southern EU (i.e. organic farming systems) frequently
show coexistence of livestock (e.g. small ruminants) and cropping
systems (e.g. olives), which facilitates CA practices such as crop
rotations as well as the reusing of manures as fertilizers (Kassam
et al., 2012).
Mitigation through water management approaches also
presents a high potential. Spate irrigation dominates African
regions under Mediterranean conditions (FAO, 2011a, 2011b).
Irrigated crops are grown under full controlled irrigation, which
includes surface, sprinkler and drip irrigation in the EU, EEUU and
Oceania. Among the irrigation technologies used in Mediterranean
cropping systems, furrows are still widespread in summer-
irrigated crops, followed by increasing sprinkler irrigation systems
(MAGRAMA, 2014). Surface irrigation with furrows was applied in
62% and 71% of the total irrigated cropland (14,249 ha and 3,297 ha)
for maize and wheat, respectively, according to a survey based
report focusing on farmers practices of the Ebro watershed (Spain)
(Sisquella et al., 2004). Water-saving irrigation systems such as
drip irrigation (both surface and subsurface) are still being
developed.
Fertigation use is increasing, particularly in high-value crops
(e.g. horticulture, orchards) which are very representative in
Mediterranean areas. According to FAO (2014), around 9 million ha
of cropland are currently under fertigation.
Nitrogen over-fertilization has been noticed in agricultural
systems of high income economies, mostly in irrigated cropping
systems. On average, 57% of the N crop uptake is over applied in
Europe (Sánchez et al., 2016). This percentage is even higher in
certain Mediterranean EU countries, such as Italy and Spain, where
there are hotspots of intensive livestock production, leading to
large quantities of manures normally surface-applied to croplands
(Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014a). As an example, in maize crops of
Table 3
Main component and mitigation practices associated of each cropping system in Mediterranean areas (NA = not applicable).
Crop type Main component of radiative forcing Main mitigation practice Other pollutants
Rain-fed Irrigated Rain-fed Irrigated Rain-fed Irrigated
Herbaceous Machinery/
external inputs;
C seq. (NT)
N2O Reducing fuel consumption and
external inputs, reduced tillage,
crop rotations (including
legumes), adjusted N rates, Nis
Water management
(e.g. drip irrigation), N
fertilization (e.g.
adjusted N rates, Nis)
Increased
NH3
Increased
NH3,
NO3

Fruit
orchards
C sequestration N2O NA Cover crops, pruning
crop residues
NA NA
Rice NA CH4 NA Water management,
straw management
mitigation strategies
NA Increased
N2O
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 15
Catalonia and Aragón (NE Spain) farmers apply more than
400 kg N ha1 in 84% of the cropping area due to application of
both manures and synthetic fertilizers (Sisquella et al., 2004).
According to expert judgement, this can be extrapolated to
cropping areas of California (USA), Australia and Chile although.
In these regions, surface application of manure is common on
pasture and silage
fields and some rangelands.
The implementation of technological mitigation solutions
focusing on fertilization, such as urease and nitrification inhibitors,
is expected to be limited in Mediterranean cropping systems,
mostly due to associated extra costs for farmers. According to
producers, the use of inhibitors increases cost of synthetic N
fertilizer by 20% (Sutton et al., 2015). According to this, a larger
expansion would be expected in high income economies (e.g. EU,
EEUU and Australia), where there could exist subsidies for farmers
to adopt this kind of technology.
Based on this analysis, there is large potential for implementing
the strategies presented in this review. However, there are certain
constraints that may make their implementation more difficult in
the coming years.
5.1. Constraints to management practice change
Constraints to management practice change by farmers, and the
overall impact of these constraints on implementation of the
practice, assessed by expert judgement are summarized in Table 2.
The application of most of these agronomic measures can be
hindered by economic constraints. Several practices require
aninitial investment for the acquisition of specific equipment
(improved irrigation technology, fertigation, crop residues and
agro-industry by-product management, low/no tillage). Economic
constraints could also arise in the form of a regular cost due to
possible yield penalties (N fertilization adjustment, organic fertili-
zation, low/no tillage and cover crops). In the case of crop rotations
and the use of crop residues and agro-industry by-products, these
practices can reduce benefits from other economic activities.
Most agronomic measures described in this review are also
accompanied by some kind of technical constraint. This mainly
relates to N fertilizer adjustment, the substitution of synthetic
fertilizer by manures, the application of sewage sludge, no/low
tillage practices, cover crops and crop rotations. Some of these
practices require additional work, such as soil sampling, or
learning how to use or maintain new equipment (e.g. incorporation
of manures, improved irrigation technology, fertigation and
low/no tillage). Finally, low/no tillage practices can increase weeds
and soil compaction problems, thus increasing the need for
additional management practices, particularly the
first years after
adoption (Soane et al., 2012; Armengot et al., 2015).
Social constraints to management change are largely associated
with farmer perceptions (Sánchez-Girón et al., 2004; Ingram et al.,
2014; Sánchez et al., 2014, 2016). Conventional farmers can be
reluctant to implement some of the practices because of strong
traditions (e.g., crop residue management, no-tillage, cover crops)
or having a perception of decreased productivity due to practice
implementation (e.g., adjusting fertilization rates or shifting from
synthetic fertilizers to manure). Further, new recommended
practices (e.g., nitrification and urease inhibitors, biochar), which
are not yet widespread among neighboring farmers can be
negatively perceived (Hussain et al., 2016). A lack of training for
practices with high technical or maintenance requirements (e.g.,
irrigation technology, cover crops, crop rotations, adjusting
fertilization rates) may lead to management difficulties, or the
misuse and decline of yields, in turn encouraging the negative
perception of the practice's effectiveness (Cantero-Martínez et al.,
2007; Abalos et al., 2013). Legal restrictions for management,
treatment and transportation may also hinder the adoption of
practices related to the use of manure, agro-industry by-products
or sludge.
Environmental constraints to the adoption of management
practices are mainly related to pollution (e.g., heavy metal
accumulation through sludge use or by
flooding water management,
Klee et al., 2004 increased application of herbicides by notillage,
Annett et al., 2014) and health issues (e.g., for liquid
manures, Cole et al., 2000; or by-products without pre-treatment
applied to crops). Other environmental constraints can be
associated with risk of
fire due to leaving crop residues on the
soil surface (Luna et al., 2012).
Nonetheless, except for environmental constraints, most of the
barriers can be overcome by long term monetary savings or gains
associated with the practice. Most practices reduce the need of
exogenous N fertilizer, which is one of the main expenses for
farmers (Aizpurua et al., 2010; Abalos et al., 2014a; Aguilera et al.,
2015a,b). Improved irrigation technology, fertigation, or use of crop
residues and agro-industry by-products can reduce crop water
requirements, whereas crop rotations and improved irrigation
technology may also decrease the need for pesticides and/or
herbicides. Conservation tillage practices also reduce labor costs
and fuel consumption (Sánchez et al., 2016), while improved
irrigation technology and fertigation save time and labor costs
(Thompson et al., 2000). In other cases, the practice improves soil
quality and can increase crop yields and/or quality in the medium
or long term, as for the substitution of synthetic fertilizers by slurry
(Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2014a), the use of crop residues and agroindustry
by products, fertigation and improved irrigation technol-
ogy (Kennedy et al., 2013; Ayars et al., 2015), low/no tillage, cover
crops and crop rotations (Ferrio et al., 2007). Finally, in some cases,
an extra benefit is produced, as for crop residues and agro-industry
by-products (Arthurson, 2009).
Further, there are increasing numbers of innovative farmers and
associations who are implementing some management practices
with positive results and are demonstrating their effectiveness,
and advising to other interested or neighboring farmers. Some of
the practices are already included in the greening requirements of
the European Union Common Agricultural Policy (e.g., crop
diversification, crop rotations particularly those which involve
legumes), allowing economic incentives to encourage implementation
among farmers (Ingram et al., 2014).
5.2. Assessing policy options to regulate the implementation of
different mitigation strategies
The main outcomes of the literature review and the expert
judgement as discussed during a workshop held in Butrón
(Bizkaia) in December 2016, to synthesize the most promising
measures to abate N2O from cropping systems is presented in
Table 1 and 2. This information enabled to perform an assessment
based on the simple framework developed by Pannell (2008). This
framework was used for choosing environmental policy options to
regulate the implementation of different mitigation strategies
(Fig. 2). In the diagram, the public benefit in the “y” axis refers to
the percentage of mitigation (i.e., scale from
100 to 100%) of every
mitigation strategy based on the collected literature review values.
We calculated the private net benefit to the farmer on the “x”
axis according to the experts’ weights (i.e., scale from
5 to 5) on
the potential cost and benefit of every mitigation strategy (Table 1).
When applying the framework, the use of agricultural extension is
highly recommended to engage farmers to adopt strategies that do
not imply a cost to the farmer, but that can have large benefits to
society (e.g., adjusting N fertilization, manure fertilization,
fertigation, increasing legumes, advanced irrigation technology,
judicious crop residue management; see Fig. 2). The agricultural
extension option may include the increase of agricultural
16 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
demonstrations and communications, to transfer scientific and
technological
findings to the farming community. This would
enhance access to technical education on management practices
that deliver mitigation, and support the enlargement of farming
networks. Strategies such as injection of slurries, cover crops,
application of composted sewage sludge, biochar and use of
nitrification or urease inhibitors showed negative or negligible
economic net benefits for the farmers (private benefits). In this
case, two potential policy options might be applied, according to
Pannell (2008): i) positive incentives if societal net benefits are
high; and ii) technology development or no action when the public
net benefits are moderate or not high enough to warrant incentives
(Fig. 2).
6. Beyond the plot scale: assessing the combined effect of
reduced fertilization and drip irrigation on GHG emissions
Selected management actions show a strong potential for
mitigation of specific GHGs. However, it is important to assess this
potential within a context of the total GHG budget, including all the
involved processes in the production chain, beyond the plot scale,
in order to identify possible trade-offs.
Here we present the results of a simple exercise to illustrate
these trade-offs by comparing the total life cycle emissions
(including infrastructure production, electricity production, fertilizer
production, and direct and indirect N2O emissions) associated
with irrigation and N fertilization inputs in a series of hypothetical
scenarios. The scenarios cover three irrigation technologies (drip,
sprinkler and furrow) under two fertilization application rates (100
and 300 kg N ha1 yr1) and two levels of water pumping height
(surface and 200 m underground) under Mediterranean conditions
(Fig. 3). We estimated GHG emissions employing published
emission coefficients for each process involved, including specific
direct N2O emission factors for Mediterranean irrigation types
(Cayuela et al., 2017). Drip irrigation leads to lower overall N2O
emission levels only under certain conditions, particularly when a
high energy input has to be applied for water lifting and N is
applied at the high rate, as a result of lower water demand and
lower N2O emission factor (Fig. 3). However, in some situations, the
higher infrastructure burden and the energy needed for pressur-
izing lead to higher GHG emissions (CO2 eq ha1 yr1) from drip
irrigation than from furrow irrigation. Likewise, furrow irrigation
delivers the lowest emission level when water is easily available
and N is applied at the low rate, but the highest when water is
extracted from deep wells. On the other hand, our calculations
show that the outside-farm production of major inputs such as
electricity and N fertilizer is the main contributor to the balance in
most situations explored, suggesting that the main focus for
reducing the GHG balance of these systems should focus on
reducing the CO2 eq. foot-print associated to these inputs. This
could be achieved by reducing the amount of inputs, e.g.
optimizing N fertilizer rate and avoiding water with high
extraction costs. A complementary strategy would be to minimize
the CO2 eq. emissions from the production of these inputs by, for
example, substituting synthetic fertilizers by organic sources of N
(residues, biological N
fixation) and employing renewable energy
for electricity production. It is, therefore, important to consider all
the life cycle emissions under each specific circumstance in order
to select the best set of practices to maximize mitigation benefits
and reach cost-effectiveness in producing a unit of food.
7. Structural changes: behaviors and practices that can function
alongside agronomic GHG mitigation
Even if an optimized set of practices in terms of GHGs emissions
from soils is implemented, this could still result in an increased
overall sectorial emission due to energy intensive practices (such
long term transport) or increased waste along the production
Fig. 2. Policy options based on the Pannell (2008) framework for the GHG mitigation strategies in Mediterranean areas. This is based on choosing environmental policy
options to regulate the implementation of different mitigation strategies. The societal public benefit in the y-axis refers to the percentage of mitigation (i.e., scale from
100 to
100%) of every mitigation strategy based on literature review values. We calculated the private net benefit to the farmer in the x-axis according to the weights (i.e., scale from
5 to 5) on the potential cost and benefit of every mitigation strategy. These values were assigned by experts’ judgement.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 17
chain. Globally, 2.7 Tg of N are emitted to the environment in the
production of food waste (Grizzetti et al., 2013). A reduction of food
waste could significantly reduce the amount of reactive N emitted
to the environment during primary production, including N2O
(Bodirsky et al., 2014; Lamb et al., 2016). Between 3 and 15% of N2O
emissions could be suppressed by avoiding food waste at the
consumer level (Grizzetti et al., 2013; Vanham et al., 2015).
Additionally, curbing food waste would help to avoid GHG
emissions associated with waste management, particularly landfill
CH4 emissions, which, in a Mediterranean country such as Spain,
represented a similar level of emissions as enteric fermentation by
livestock in 2012 (MAGRAMA, 2014). This mitigation measure is
not specific to the Mediterranean region, other than considering
the relatively high food waste rates that are particularly relevant at
the consumption level of the Mediterranean countries belonging to
Europe or N America (Gustavsson et al., 2011). While the consumer
part is behavioural, the waste produced at other levels, namely
supermarket, distribution, agroindustry or farm, can be associated
with prices and competitiveness strategies (Parfitt et al., 2010).
Food waste reductions could be influenced by policy measures, but
diverse conflicts of interest could represent a barrier to implementation.
Changes in diet among population in developed and emerging
economies have led in recent years to unexpected increases in
GHGs emissions due to increased demand for meat and other
livestock products. A reduction of animal protein consumption by
50% in the EU would lead to a reduction of GHG emissions by 25 to
40%, depending on the alternative use of the land (Westhoek et al.,
2014). In several Mediterranean countries such as Spain, Italy and
Greece, the share of animal protein in the total protein intake has
increased from
35 to over 60%, evolving from a typical
Mediterranean diet to a diet rich in animal protein, over recent
decades (Lassaletta et al., 2014c). A reduction of 40% of meat and
dairy consumption would reduce GHG emissions by 20 to 30%.
Transport of food can also contribute significantly to the
footprint of agricultural products. With the exception of France, all
countries of the Mediterranean basin are net importers of
agricultural products, particularly in the form of feed. In 2009,
the countries of the Mediterranean basin net-imported 2.3 Tg N
embedded in traded commodities, most of them cultivated in
South America, North America, Northern European Countries and
Russia (Fig. 4). The production of feed in other countries generates
at the same time and spatial leakage of emissions that are not
considered by the national inventories (Lassaletta et al., 2014a). On
the other hand, reducing feed demand within Mediterranean
countries could reduce the need for land expansion at global scale.
The reintroduction of the Mediterranean diet (i.e., a back reduction
to
35% of animal protein, see Bach-Faig et al., 2011 for a detailed
description of the current Mediterranean diet) would reverse this
trend: animal production would be lower, land would become
available for other purposes and GHG emissions could be reduced
by more than 50% (Sáez-Almendros et al., 2013).
In summary, even if the most cost-effective practices are
implemented in feed and livestock production, their impacts on
GHGs mitigation may be offset by increased demand of high GHGintensity
products (such as meat), increases in food waste at the
consumer level and long distance transport. Both reduction of food
waste and animal protein consumption represent a reduction of
the food demand, and will not only reduce GHG emissions in the
agriculture sector, but will also lead to important co-benefits such
as decreased demand of agricultural land, giving space for
afforestation and reducing deforestation of natural forests, reduce
biodiversity loss and improving ecosystem services.
Fig. 3. Estimation of greenhouse gas emissions (kg CO2eq ha1 yr1) associated to irrigation and N fertilization in Mediterranean cropping systems for three different
irrigation types (drip, sprinkle and furrow) under two levels of N fertilization rate (100 and 300 kg N ha1 yr1) and two levels of pumping height (0 m and 100 m). Emission
values are based on data from: infrastructure: Lal (2004); electricity: direct electricity consumption from Aguilera et al. (2015c) and electricity emission factor from Aguilera
et al. (2015b); fertilizer production (average N fertilizers, Europe): Ecoinvent Centre (2007); N2O – indirect: IPCC (2006); N2O – direct: Cayuela et al. (2017).
18 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
Finally, disconnection between feed and livestock production
systems at the regional and global scales results in low nutrient use
efficiency of agro-ecosystems, because of difficulties in closing
nutrient cycles. Lack of manure in specialized cropping areas leads
to higher needs of synthetic fertilizers, and overuse of manure
often occur in areas with high animal concentrations (Bai et al.,
2014; Billen et al., 2013; Lassaletta et al., 2014a; Naylor et al., 2005;
van Grinsven et al., 2014). This phenomenon is driven by the
economic benefits associated with spatial concentration of
livestock systems, in combination with the low economic value
of manure per unit of mass. It has been observed for example in
Spain and Italy where areas of livestock production concentration
generates too much manure and slurries that are difficult to
manage (Lassaletta et al., 2012; Penuelas et al., 2009). In addition,
very high manure application rates, typical of livestock concentra-
tion areas, are associated with unusually high N2O EFs under
Mediterranean conditions (Heller et al., 2010). The potential of
reconnecting livestock and crop farming for mitigating GHG
emissions is illustrated by several examples at the local or regional
level (Granlund et al., 2015; Sasu-Boakye et al., 2014; Soussana and
Lemaire, 2014). Note however that, due to the high level of animal
protein production in some regions, both for local consumption
and export, a generalized transition to reconnection based on
higher local feed consumption would only be possible if it were
accompanied by a reduction of animal protein in the human diet
(van Grinsven et al., 2015, 2014; Westhoek et al., 2014). A higher
demand of non-oil crops feeds replacing soy, with lower protein
contents, could otherwise entail a higher land demand that could
offset the mitigation benefits or/and could compete with human
food. In several Mediterranean countries with livestock production
highly dependent on feed imports, a generalized reconnection
would require a transition towards the Mediterranean diet and also
a reduction of food waste. Thus, important positive synergies
between dietary changes, food waste reduction, production close
to consumers and livestock-crop reconnection could arise when
developed simultaneously.
8. Conclusions
The framework for GHG mitigation provided here, based on
solid and comprehensive scientific evidence, is of wide societal,
environmental and economic interest, affecting all stakeholders in
the Mediterranean agricultural sector, from farmers to govern-
ments.
Efficient implementation thus will require effective policies,
closer collaboration between scientists, stakeholders and farmers,
and enhanced public awareness and engagement.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Spanish National R+D+i
Plan (AGL2012-37815-C05-01, AGL2012-37815-C05-04) and very
specifically the workshop held in December 2016 in Butrón
(Bizkaia) to synthesize the most promising measures to reduce
N2O emissions from Spanish agricultural soils. BC3 is sponsored by
the Basque Government. M. L. Cayuela thanks Fundación Seneca
for
financing the project 19281/PI/14. This paper has been
produced within the context of the REMEDIA network: http://
redremedia.wordpress.com/.
References
Abalos, D., Sanz-Cobena, A., Misselbrook, T., Vallejo, A., 2012. Effectiveness of urease
inhibition on the abatement of ammonia, nitrous oxide and nitric oxide
emissions in a non-irrigated Mediterranean barley
field. Chemosphere 89, 310–
318.
Abalos, D., Sanz-Cobena, A., Garcia-Torres, L., van Groenigen, J.W., Vallejo, A., 2013.
Role of maize stover incorporation on nitrogen oxide emissions in a
nonirrigated Mediterranean barley
field. Plant Soil 364 (1–2), 357–371. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-012-1367-4.
Abalos, D., Jeffery, S., Sanz-Cobena, A., Guardia, G., Vallejo, A., 2014a. Meta-analysis
of the effect of urease and nitrification inhibitors on crop productivity and
nitrogen use efficiency. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 189, 136–144. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.03.036.
Abalos, D., Sánchez-Martín, L., Garcia-Torres, L., van Groenigen, J.W., Vallejo, A.,
2014b. Management of irrigation frequency and nitrogen fertilization to
Fig. 4. Net protein
fluxes (expressed in nitrogen) of food and feed imported to Mediterranean regions from the otherworld countries in 2009. Mediterranean regions marked
in black. Green countries are those which are net exporting N to the analyzed region. Yellow/red countries are those which are net importing N from the analyzed region.
Arrows show
fluxes between any region and the studied region. Fluxes below 50 Gg N are not represented. Calculated following Lassaletta et al. (2014b). (For interpretation of
the references to colour in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 19
mitigate GHG and NO emissions from drip-fertigated crops. Sci. Total Environ.
490, 880–888. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.05.065.
Abalos, D., Jeffery, S., Drury, C.F., Wagner-Riddle, C., 2016. Improving fertilizer
management in the US and Canada for N2O mitigation: understanding potential
positive and negative side-effects on corn yields. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 221,
214–221.
Aguilera, E., Lassaletta, L., Gattinger, A., Gimeno, B.S., 2013a. Managing soil carbon
for climate change mitigation and adaptation in Mediterranean cropping
systems: a meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 168, 25–36. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2013.02.003.
Aguilera, E., Lassaletta, L., Sanz-Cobena, A., Garnier, J., Vallejo, A., 2013b. The
potential of organic fertilizers and water management to reduce N2O emissions
in Mediterranean climate cropping systems. A review. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
164, 32–52. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2012.09.006.
Aguilera, E., Guzmán, G., Alonso, A., 2015a. Greenhouse gas emissions from
conventional and organic cropping systems in Spain. I. Herbaceous crops.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 713–724.
Aguilera, E., Guzmán, G., Alonso, A., 2015b. Greenhouse gas emissions from
conventional and organic cropping systems in Spain: II. Fruit tree orchards.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 725–737.
Aguilera, E., Guzmán, G.I., Infante-Amate, J., Soto, D., García-Ruiz, R., Herrera, A.,
Villa, I., Torremocha, E., Carranza, G., González de Molina, M., 2015c. Embodied
energy in agricultural inputs. Incorporating a historical perspective. DT-SEHA
1507 .
Aizpurua, A., Estavillo, J.M., Castellón, A., Alonso, A., Besga, G., Ortuzar-Iragorri, M.A.,
2010. Estimation of optimum nitrogen fertilizer rates in winter wheat in humid
mediterranean conditions, II: economically optimal dose of nitrogen. Commun.
Soil Sci. Plant Anal. 41, 301–307. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00103620903460815.
Akiyama, H., Yan, X., Yagi, K., 2010. Evaluation of effectiveness of enhancedefficiency
fertilizers as mitigation options for N2O and NO emissions from
agricultural soils: meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol.16,1837–1846. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.02031.x.
Al-Adamat, R., Rawajfih, Z., Easter, M., Paustian, K., Coleman, K., Milne, E., Falloon, P.,
Powlson, D.S., Batjes, N.H., 2007. Predicted soil organic carbon stocks and
changes in Jordan between 2000 and 2030 made using the GEFSOC Modelling
System. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 122, 35–45. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2007.01.006.
Albiach, R., Canet, R., Pomares, F., Ingelmo, F., 2001. Organic matter components,
aggregate stability and biological activity in a horticultural soil fertilized with
different rates of two sewage sludges during ten years. Bioresour. Technol. 77,
109–114. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0960-8524(00)00166-8.
Alonso-Ayuso, M., Gabriel, J.L., Quemada, M., 2014. The kill date as a management
tool for cover cropping success. PLoS One 9, e109587. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0109587.
Álvaro-Fuentes, J., López, M.V., Cantero-Martinez, C., Arrúe, J.L., 2008. Tillage effects
on soil organic carbon fractions in mediterranean dryland agroecosystems. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. J. 72, 541. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2007.0164.
Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cantero-Martínez, C., López, M.V., Paustian, K., Denef, K., Stewart,
C.E., Arrúe, J.L., 2009. Soil aggregation and soil organic carbon stabilization:
effects of management in semiarid Mediterranean agroecosystems. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. J. 73, 1519–1529.
Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Plaza-Bonilla, D., Arrúe, J.L., Lampurlanés, J., Cantero-Martínez, C.,
2014. Soil organic carbon storage in a no-tillage chronosequence under
Mediterranean conditions. Plant Soil 376, 31–41. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11104-012-1167-x.
Annett, R., Habibi, H.R., Hontela, A., 2014. Impact of glyphosate and glyphosate-
based herbicides on the freshwater environment. J. Appl. Toxicol. 34, 458–479.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jat.2997.
Armengot, L., Berner, A., Blanco-Moreno, J.M., Mäder, P., Sans, F.X., 2015. Long-term
feasibility of reduced tillage in organic farming. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 339–
346. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13593-014-0249-y.
Arthurson, V., 2009. Closing the global energy and nutrient cycles through
application of biogas residue to agricultural land – potential benefits and
drawback. Energies 2, 226–242. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en20200226.
Aschmann, H., 1973. Distribution and peculiarity of mediterranean ecosystems.
Mediterranean Type Ecosystems. Springer, pp. 11–19. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-65520-3_2.
Ayars, J.E., Fulton, A., Taylor, B., 2015. Subsurface drip irrigation in California—Here
to stay? Agric. Water Manag. 157, 39–47. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agwat.2015.01.001.
Bach-Faig, A., Berry, E.M., Lairon, D., Reguant, J., Trichopoulou, A., Dernini, S.,
Medina, F.X., Battino, M., Belahsen, R., Miranda, G., Serra-Majem, L.,
Mediterranean Diet Fdn Expert, G., 2011. Mediterranean diet pyramid today.
Science and cultural updates. Public Health Nutr. 14, 2274–2284.
Bai, Z.H., Ma, L., Qin, W., Chen, Q., Oenema, O., Zhang, F.S., 2014. Changes in pig
production in China and their effects on nitrogen and phosphorus use and
losses. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 12742–12749. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
es502160v.
Balota, E.L., Calegari, A., Nakatani, A.S., Coyne, M.S., 2014. Benefits of winter cover
crops and no-tillage for microbial parameters in a Brazilian Oxisol: a long-term
study. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 197, 31–40. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2014.07.010.
Barth, G., Von Tucher, S., Schmidhalter, U., 2008. Effectiveness of 3,4-
dimethylpyrazole phosphate as nitriflcation inhibitor in soil as influenced by
inhibitor concentration, application form, and soil matric potential. Pedosphere
18, 378–385.
Basche, A.D., Miguez, F.E., Kaspar, T.C., Castellano, M.J., 2014. Do cover crops increase
or decrease nitrous oxide emissions? A meta-analysis. J. Soil Water Conserv. 69,
471–482. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2489/jswc.69.6.471.
Benlhabib, O., Yazar, A., Qadir, M., Lourenço, E., Jacobsen, S.E., 2014. How can we
improve mediterranean cropping systems? J. Agron. Crop Sci. 200, 325–332.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jac.12066.
Berenguer, P., Cela, S., Santiveri, F., Boixadera, J., Lloveras, J., 2008. Copper and zinc
soil accumulation and plant concentration in irrigated maize fertilized with
liquid swine manure. Agron. J. 100, 1056. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2007.0321.
Billen, G., Garnier, J., Lassaletta, L., 2013. The nitrogen cascade from agricultural soils
to the sea: modelling nitrogen transfers at regional watershed and global scales.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 368, 20130123. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2013.0123.
Blanco-Canqui, H., Shaver, T.M., Lindquist, J.L., Shapiro, C.A., Elmore, R.W., Francis, C.
A., Hergert, G.W., 2015. Cover crops and ecosystem services: insights from
studies in temperate soils. Agron. J. 107, 2449. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj15.0086.
Blavet, D., De Noni, G., Le Bissonnais, Y., Leonard, M., Maillo, L., Laurent, J.Y., Asseline,
J., Leprun, J.C., Arshad, M.A., Roose, E., 2009. Effect of land use and management
on the early stages of soil water erosion in French Mediterranean vineyards. Soil
Tillage Res. 106, 124–136. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2009.04.010.
Bodirsky, B.L., Popp, A., Lotze-Campen, H., Dietrich, J.P., Rolinski, S., Weindl, I.,
Schmitz, C., Müller, C., Bonsch, M., Humpenöder, F., Biewald, A., Stevanovic, M.,
2014. Reactive nitrogen requirements to feed the world in 2050 and potential to
mitigate nitrogen pollution. Nat. Commun. 5 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms4858.
Boellstorff, D., Benito, G., 2005. Impacts of set-aside policy on the risk of soil erosion
in central Spain. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 107, 231–243.
Bosch-Serra, A.D., Ortiz, C., Yagüe, M.R., Boixadera, J., 2015. Strategies to optimize
nitrogen efficiency when fertilizing with pig slurries in dryland agricultural
systems. Eur. J. Agron. 67, 27–36. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
eja.2015.03.003.
Bouwman, A.F., Boumans, L.J.M., Batjes, N.H., 2002. Modeling global annual N 2 O
and NO emissions from fertilized
fields. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 16 doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2001GB001812 28-1–28-9.
Bugg, R.L., Horwath, W., Six, J., Van Horn, M., 2007. Practical soil ecology. In: Smith,
R., Gaskell, M.L., Bugg, R.L., Daugovish, O., Van Horn, M. (Eds.), “Cover Crops for
Vegetable Farming Systems’’. University of California Agriculture and Natural
Resources 8000 Series.
CEC, 1999. Commission of european communities. council directive 99/31/EC of 26
april 1999 on the landfill of waste. Off. J. Eur. Commun. 182, 1–19.
Cantero-Martínez, C., Angás, P., Lampurlanés, J., 2007. Long-term yield and water
use efficiency under various tillage systems in Mediterranean rainfed
conditions. Ann. Appl. Biol. 150, 293–305. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-
7348.2007.00142.x.
Carranca, C., Oliveira, A., Pampulha, E., Torres, M.O., 2009. Temporal dynamics of soil
nitrogen, carbon and microbial activity in conservative and disturbed
fields
amended with mature white lupine and oat residues. Geoderma 151, 50–59.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2009.03.012.
Castaldi, S., Riondino, M., Baronti, S., Esposito, F.R., Marzaioli, R., Rutigliano, F.A.,
Vaccari, F.P., Miglietta, F., 2011. Impact of biochar application to a Mediterranean
wheat crop on soil microbial activity and greenhouse gas
fluxes. Chemosphere
85, 1464–1471. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.08.031.
Cayuela, M.L., Sánchez-Monedero, M.A., Roig, A., Hanley, K., Enders, A., Lehmann, J.,
2013. Biochar and denitrification in soils: when, how much and why does
biochar reduce N2O emissions? Sci. Rep. 3 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
srep01732.
Cayuela, M.L., van Zwieten, L., Singh, B.P., Jeffery, S., Roig, A., Sánchez-Monedero, M.
A., 2014. Biochar's role in mitigating soil nitrous oxide emissions: a review and
meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 191, 5–16. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.agee.2013.10.009.
Cayuela, M.L., Jeffery, S., van Zwieten, L., 2015. The molar H:Corg ratio of biochar is a
key factor in mitigating N2O emissions from soil. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 202,
135–138. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.12.015.
Cayuela, M.L., Aguilera, E., Sanz-Cobena, A., Adams, D.C., Abalos, D., Barton, L., Ryals,
R., Silver, W.L., Alfaro, M.A., Pappa, V.A., Smith, P., Garnier, J., Billen, G.,
Bouwman, L., Bondeau, A., Lassaletta, L., 2017. Direct nitrous oxide emissions in
Mediterranean climate cropping systems: emission factors based on a metaanalysis
of available measurement data. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 238, 25–35.
Chen, Q., An, X., Li, H., Su, J., Ma, Y., Zh, u., 2016. Long-term
field application of sewage
sludge increases the abundance of antibiotic resistance genes in soil. Environ.
Int. 92–93, 1–10.
Cole, D., Todd, L., Wing, S., 2000. Concentrated swine feeding operations and public
health: a review of occupational and community health effects. Environ. Health
Perspect. 108, 685.
Davidson, E.A., Janssens, I.A., 2006. Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon
decomposition and feedbacks to climate change. Nature 440, 165–173. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature04514.
Davidson, E.A., Hart, S.C., Shanks, C.A., Firestone, M.K., 1991. Measuring gross
nitrogen mineralization, and nitrification by 15 N isotopic pool dilution in intact
soil cores. J. Soil Sci. 42, 335–349. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2389.1991.tb00413.x.
20 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
del Prado, A., Merino, P., Estavillo, J.M., Pinto, M., González-Murua, C., 2006. N2O and
NO emissions from different N sources and under a range of soil water contents.
Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst. 74, 229–243. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10705-
006-9001-6.
del Prado, A., Alvaro-Fuentes, J., Arriaga, H., Báez, D., Bernal, M.P., Cantero, C.,
Estellés, F., Merino, P., Moral, R., Pardo, G., Salcedo, G., Calvet, S., Sanz-Cobeña, A.,
2013. GHG emissions associated with manure management from livestock
systems in a Mediterranean country. A case study: spain. RAMIRAN 2013. 15th
International Conference, Versailles, France, 3–5 June. 2013. Proceedings 2013
(978-2-7380-1337-8).
Dell, C.J., Kleinman, P.J.A., Schmidt, J.P., Beegle, D.B., 2012. Low-disturbance manure
incorporation effects on ammonia and nitrate loss. J. Environ. Qual. 41, 928–937.
Dere, A.L., Stehouwer, R.C., 2011. Labile and stable nitrogen and carbon in mine soil
reclaimed with manure-Based amendments. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 75, 890. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2010.0316.
Derpsch, R., Friedrich, T., 2009. Development and current status of no-till adoption
in the World. Proceedings of the 18th Triennial Conference of the International
Soil Tillage Research Organization (ISTRO), 15–19 June. Izmir, Turkey.
Di Bene, C., Tavarini, S., Mazzoncini, M., Angelini, L.G., 2011. Changes in soil chemical
parameters and organic matter balance after 13 years of ramie [Boehmeria
nivea (L.) Gaud.] cultivation in the Mediterranean region. Eur. J. Agron. 35, 154–
163. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2011.05.007.
Di Giacomo, G., Taglieri, L., 2009. Renewable energy benefits with conversion of
woody residues to pellets. Energy 34, 724–731. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2008.08.010.
Díaz-Cruz, M., 2003. Environmental behavior and analysis of veterinary and human
drugs in soils: sediments and sludge. Trends Anal. Chem. 22, 340–351.
Ding, X., Han, X., Liang, Y., Qiao, Y., Li, L., Li, N., 2012. Changes in soil organic carbon
pools after 10 years of continuous manuring combined with chemical fertilizer
in a Mollisol in China. Soil Tillage Res. 122, 36–41. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.still.2012.02.002.
Doltra, J., Olesen, J.E., 2013. The role of catch crops in the ecological intensification of
spring cereals in organic farming under Nordic climate. Eur. J. Agron. 44, 98–
108. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2012.03.006.
Ecoinvent Centre, 2007. Ecoinvent Data v2.0. Ecoinvent Reports No. 1–25. Swiss
Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Dübendorf.
FAO, 2011a. What is Conservation Agriculture? FAO Conservation Agriculture Web-
site at: http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/1a.html.
FAO, 2011b. CA Adoption Worldwide. FAO AQUASTAT Conservation Agriculture
Web-site at: http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/6c.html.
FAO, 2014. AQUASTAT Main Database, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO).
FAOStat, 2016. FAOSTAT database collections. Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. http://faostat.fao.org.
Feilberg, A., Nyord, T., Hansen, M.N., Lindholst, S., 2011. Chemical evaluation of odor
reduction by soil injection of animal manure. J. Environ. Qual. 40 (5),1674–1682.
Fernández, J.M., Plaza, C., García-Gil, J.C., Polo, A., 2009. Biochemical properties and
barley yield in a semiarid Mediterranean soil amended with two kinds of
sewage sludge. Appl. Soil Ecol. 42, 18–24. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsoil.2009.01.006.
Ferrio, J.P., Arab, G., Bort, J., Buxó, R., Molist, M., Voltas, J., Araus, J.L., 2007. Land use
changes and crop productivity in early agriculture: comparison with current
conditions in the mid-Euphrates valley. In: Karam, F., Karaa, K., Lamaddalena, N.,
Bogliotti, C. (Eds.), Harmonization and Integration of Water Saving Options.
Convention and Promotion of Water Saving Policies and Guidelines. 5th
WASAMED Workshop (Malta, 3–7 May 2006, Options Méditerranéennes, Série
B, pp. 167–174 (No. 59).
Flavel, T.C., Murphy, D.V., Lalor, B.M., Fillery, I.R.P., 2005. Gross N mineralization
rates after application of composted grape marc to soil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 37,
1397–1400. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2004.12.003.
Flotats, X., Bonmatí, A., Fernández, B., Magrí, A., 2009. Manure treatment
technologies: on-farm versus centralized strategies. NE Spain as case study.
Biores. Technol. 100, 5519–5526.
Franco-Otero, V.G., Soler-Rovira, P., Hernández, D., López-de-Sá, E.G., Plaza, C., 2012.
Short-term effects of organic municipal wastes on wheat yield, microbial
biomass, microbial activity, and chemical properties of soil. Biol. Fertil. Soils 48,
205–216. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00374-011-0620-y.
Gabriel, J.L., Muñoz-Carpena, R., Quemada, M., 2012. The role of cover crops in
irrigated systems: water balance, nitrate leaching and soil mineral nitrogen
accumulation. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 155, 50–61. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2012.03.021.
García-Marco, S., Ravella, S.R., Chadwick, D., Vallejo, A., Gregory, A.S., Cárdenas, L.M.,
2014. Ranking factors affecting emissions of GHG from incubated agricultural
soils. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 65, 573–583. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejss.12143.
Gendebien, A., Davis, B., Hobson, J., Palfrey, R., Pitchers, R., Rumsby, P., Carlton-
Smith, C., Middleton, J., 2008. Environmental, economic and social impacts of
the use of sewage sludge on land. Summary Report 1. Assessment of Existing
Knowledge. Report Prepared by Milieu Ltd., WRc and RPA for the European
Commission, DG Environment Under Study Contract DG ENV.G.4/ETU.
Gilsanz, C., Báez, D., Misselbrook, T.H., Dhanoa, M.S., Cárdenas, L.M., 2016.
Development of emission factors and efficiency of two nitrification inhibitors,
DCD and DMPP. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 216, 1–8. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.agee.2015.09.030.
González-Sánchez, E.J., Ordóñez-Fernández, R., Carbonell-Bojollo, R., Veroz-
González, O., Gil-Ribes, J.A., 2012. Meta-analysis on atmospheric carbon capture
in Spain through the use of conservation agriculture. Soil Tillage Res.122, 52–60.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2012.03.001.
González-Sánchez, E.J., Veroz-Gonzalez, O., Blanco-Roldan, G.L., Marquez-Garcia, F.,
Carbonell-Bojollo, R., 2015. A renewed view of conservation agriculture and its
evolution over the last decade in Spain. Soil Tillage Res. 146, 204–212.
Granlund, K., Rankinen, K., Etheridge, R., Seuri, P., Lehtoranta, J., 2015. Ecological
recycling agriculture can reduce inorganic nitrogen losses -model results from
three Finnish catchments. Agric. Syst. 133, 167–176. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agsy.2014.10.015.
Grizzetti, B., Pretato, U., Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Garnier, J., 2013. The contribution of
food waste to global and European nitrogen pollution. Environ. Sci. Policy 33,
186–195. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2013.05.013.
Guardia, G., Tellez-Rio, A., García-Marco, S., Martin-Lammerding, D., Tenorio, J.L.,
Ibáñez, M.Á., Vallejo, A., 2016. Effect of tillage and crop (cereal versus legume)
on greenhouse gas emissions and Global Warming Potential in a non-irrigated
Mediterranean
field. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 221, 187–197. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.01.047.
Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., Otterdijk, R., Meybeck, A., 2011. Global
Food Losses and Food Waste?extent, Causes and Prevention. Study Conducted
Forthe International Congress SAVE FOOD! At Interpack Düsseldorf, Germany.
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, pp. 2011.
Heller, H., Bar-Tal, A., Tamir, G., Bloom, P., Venterea, R.T., Chen, D., Zhang, Y., Clapp, C.
E., Fine, P., 2010. Effects of manure and cultivation on carbon dioxide and nitrous
oxide emissions from a corn
field under mediterranean conditions. J. Environ.
Qual. 39, 437. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/jeq2009.0027.
Hernanz, J., López, R., Navarrete, L., Sánchez-Girón, V., 2002. Long-term effects of
tillage systems and rotations on soil structural stability and organic carbon
stratification in semiarid central Spain. Soil Tillage Res. 66, 129–141. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0167-1987(02)00021-1.
Holland, J.M., 2004. The environmental consequences of adopting conservation
tillage in Europe: reviewing the evidence. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.103,1–25. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2003.12.018.
Hou, Y., Velthof, G.L., Oenema, O., 2015. Mitigation of ammonia, nitrous oxide and
methane emissions from manure management chains: a meta-analysis and
integrated assessment. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1293–1312. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/gcb.12767.
Huérfano, X., Fuertes-Mendizábal, T., Duñabeitia, M.K., González-Murua, C.,
Estavillo, J.M., Menéndez, S., 2015. Splitting the application of 3,4-
dimethylpyrazole phosphate (DMPP): Influence on greenhouse gases emissions
and wheat yield and quality under humid Mediterranean conditions. Eur. J.
Agron. 64, 47–57. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2014.11.008.
Hussain, M., Farooq, M., Nawaz, A., Al-Sadi, A.M., Solaiman, Z.M., Alghamdi, S.S.,
Ammara, U., Ok, Y.S., Siddique, K.H.M., 2016. Biochar for crop production:
potential benefits and risks. J. Soils Sediments doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11368-016-1360-2.
IPCC, 2006. Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Prepared by the
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme. IGES, Japan.
Ingram, J., Mills, J., Frelih-Larsen, A., Davis, M., Merante, P., Ringrose, S., Molnar, A.,
Sánchez, B., Ghaley, B.B., Karaczun, Z., 2014. Managing soil organic carbon: a
farm perspective. EuroChoices 13, 12–19. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1746-
692x.12057.
Jordán, A., Zavala, L.M., Gil, J., 2010. Effects of mulching on soil physical properties
and runoff under semi-arid conditions in southern Spain. CATENA 81, 77–85.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2010.01.007.
Küçükdogan, A., Güven, B., Balcıoglu, I., 2015. Mapping the environmental risk of
antibiotic contamination by using multi-Criteria decision analysis. Clean Soil Air
Water 43, 1316–1326.
Kala9c, P., 2012. Carotenoids, ergosterol and tocopherols in fresh and preserved
herbage and their transfer to bovine milk fat and adipose tissues: a review. J.
Agrobiol. 29, 1–13. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/v10146-012-0001-7.
Kallenbach, C.M., Rolston, D.E., Horwath, W.R., 2010. Cover cropping affects soil N2O
and CO2 emissions differently depending on type of irrigation. Agric. Ecosyst.
Environ. 137, 251–260. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2010.02.010.
Kassam, A., Friedrich, T., Derpsch, R., Lahmar, R., Mrabet, R., Basch, G., González-
Sánchez, E.J., Serraj, R., 2012. Conservation agriculture in the dry Mediterranean
climate. F. Crop. Res. 132, 7–17. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2012.02.023.
Kennedy, T.L., Suddick, E.C., Six, J., 2013. Reduced nitrous oxide emissions and
increased yields in California tomato cropping systems under drip irrigation
and fertigation. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 170, 16–27. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2013.02.002.
Kessel, C., Venterea, R., Six, J., Adviento-Borbe, M.A., Linquist, B., Groenigen, K.J.,
2013. Climate, duration, and N placement determine N2O emissions in reduced
tillage systems: a meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 19, 33–44. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2012.02779.x.
Kim, D.-G., Hernandez-Ramirez, G., Giltrap, D., 2013. Linear and nonlinear
dependency of direct nitrous oxide emissions on fertilizer nitrogen input: a
meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 168, 53–65. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2012.02.021.
Kleber, M., Nikolaus, P., Kuzyakov, Y., Stahr, K., 2000. Formation of mineral N (NH4+,
NO3-) during mineralization of organic matter from coal refuse material and
municipal sludge. J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci. 163, 73–80. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/(SICI)1522-2624(200002)163:1<73:AID-JPLN73>3.0.CO;2-S.
Klee, N., Gustavsson, L., Kosmehl, T., Engwall, M., Erdinger, L., Braunbeck, T., Hollert,
H., 2004. Changes in toxicity and genotoxicity of industrial sewage sludge
samples containing nitro- and amino-aromatic compounds following
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 21
treatment in bioreactors with different oxygen regimes. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
11, 313–320. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/bf02979645.
Kool, D.M., Dolfing, J., Wrage, N., Van Groenigen, J.W., 2011. Nitrifier denitrification
as a distinct and significant source of nitrous oxide from soil. Soil Biol. Biochem.
43, 174–178. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2010.09.030.
Kudo, Y., Noborio, K., Shimoozono, N., Kurihara, R., 2014. The effective water
management practice for mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and maintaining
rice yield in central Japan. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 186, 77–85. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.01.015.
López-Bellido, L., López-Garrido, F.J., Fuentes, M., Castillo, J.E., Fernández, E.J., 1997.
Influence of tillage, crop rotation and nitrogen fertilization on soil organic
matter and nitrogen under rain-fed Mediterranean conditions. Soil Tillage Res.
43, 277–293. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0167-1987(97)00018-4.
López-Bellido, L., López-Bellido, R.J., Castillo, J.E., López-Bellido, F.J., 2000. Effects of
tillage, crop rotation, and nitrogen fertilization on wheat under rainfed
mediterranean conditions. Agron. J. 92, 1054. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2000.9261054x.
López-Bellido, R.J., Fontán, J.M., López-Bellido, F.J., López-Bellido, L., 2010. Carbon
sequestration by tillage, rotation, and nitrogen fertilization in a Mediterranean
Vertisol. Agron. J. 102, 310–318.
López-Fando, C., Almendros, G., 1995. Interactive effects of tillage and crop rotations
on yield and chemical properties of soils in semi-arid central Spain. Soil Tillage
Res. 36, 45–57. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0167-1987(95)00495-5.
Lahmar, R., 2010. Adoption of conservation agriculture in Europe: lessons of the
KASSA project. Land Use Policy 27, 4–10.
Lal, R., 2004. Carbon emission from farm operations. Environ. Int. 30, 981–990.
Lal, R., 2011. Sequestering carbon in soils of agro-ecosystems. Food Policy 36, S33–
S39. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2010.12.001.
Lamb, A., Green, R., Bateman, I., Broadmeadow, M., Bruce, T., Burney, J., Carey, P.,
Chadwick, D., Crane, E., Field, R., Goulding, K., Griffiths, H., Hastings, A., Kasoar,
T., Kindred, D., Phalan, B., Pickett, J., Smith, P., Wall, E., zu Ermgassen, E.K.H.J.,
Balmford, A., 2016. The potential for land sparing to offset greenhouse gas
emissions from agriculture. Nat. Clim. Change doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2910.
Lampurlanés, J., Plaza-Bonilla, D., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cantero-Martínez, C., 2016.
Long-term analysis of soil water conservation and crop yield under different
tillage systems in Mediterranean rainfed conditions. Food Crop. Res. 189, 59–67.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2016.02.010.
Lassaletta, L., Aguilera, E., 2015. Soil carbon sequestration is a climate stabilization
wedge: comments on Sommer and Bossio (2014). J. Environ. Manage. 153, 48–
49. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.01.038.
Lassaletta, L., Romero, E., Billen, G., Garnier, J., García-Gómez, H., Rovira, J.V., 2012.
Spatialized N budgets in a large agricultural Mediterranean watershed: high
loading and low transfer. Biogeosciences 9, 57–70. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.5194/bg-9-57-2012.
Lassaletta, L., Aguilera, E., Sanz-Cobena, A., Pardo, G., Billen, G., Garnier, J., Grizzetti,
B., 2014a. Leakage of nitrous oxide emissions within the Spanish agro-food
system in 1961–2009. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change 1–20. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9569-0.
Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Grizzetti, B., Garnier, J., Leach, A., Galloway, J., 2014b. Food
and feed trade as a driver in the global nitrogen cycle: 50-year trends.
Biogeochemistry 118, 225–241. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-013-
9923-4.
Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Romero, E., Garnier, J., Aguilera, E., 2014c. How changes in
diet and trade patterns have shaped the N cycle at the national scale: spain
(1961–2009). Reg. Environ. Chang. 14, 785–797. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10113-013-0536-1.
Le Mer, J., Roger, P., 2001. Production, oxidation, emission and consumption of
methane by soils: a review. Eur. J. Soil Biol. 37, 25–50. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/s1164-5563(01)01067-6.
Leip, A., Busto, M., Corazza, M., Bergamaschi, P., Koeble, R., Dechow, R., Monni, S., de
Vries, W., 2011. Estimation of N2O
fluxes at the regional scale: data, models,
challenges. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 3, 328–338. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.cosust.2011.07.002.
Lesschen, J.P., van den Berg, M., Westhoek, H.J., Witzke, H.P., Oenema, O., 2011.
Greenhouse gas emission profiles of European livestock sectors. Anim. Feed Sci.
Technol. 166-167, 16–28.
Liang, K., Zhong, X., Huang, N., Lampayan, R.M., Pan, J., Tian, K., Liu, Y., 2016. Grain
yield, water productivity and CH4 emission of irrigated rice in response to water
management in south China. Agric. Water Manag. 163, 319–331. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2015.10.015.
Linzmeier, W., Gutser, R., Schmidhalter, U., 2001. Nitrous oxide emission from soil
and from a nitrogen-15-labelled fertilizer with the new nitrification inhibitor
3,4-dimethylpyrazole phosphate (DMPP). Biol. Fertil. Soils 34, 103–108. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s003740100383.
Llewellyn, R.S., D’Emden, F., Gobbett, D., 2009. Adoption of no-till and conservation
farming practices in Australian grain growing regions: current status and
trends. Preliminary Report for South Australia No-Till Farmers Association
(SANTFA) and CA AANZ, 26 January .
Luna, J.M., Mitchell, J.P., Shrestha, A., 2012. Conservation tillage for organic
agriculture: evolution toward hybrid systems in the western USA. Renew. Agric.
Food Syst. 27, 21–30. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1742170511000494.
MAGRAMA, 2014. Inventario de emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero de España
1990–2012. Madrid.
MERMA, 2010. Encuesta Nacional de Superficies y Rendimientos. Análisis de las
técnicas de mantenimiento del suelo y méto-dos de siembra en Espãna 2010.
Viewed 4 July 2011 at: http://www.marm.es/es/estadistica/temas/encuesta-
sobre-superficies-y-rendimientos-de-cultivos-esyrce-/
EstudioMantenimientoSuelo2010tcm7-147011.pdf.
Marsden, K.A., Scowen, M., Hill, P.W., Jones, D.L., Chadwick, D.R., 2015. Plant
acquisition and metabolism of the synthetic nitrification inhibitor
dicyandiamide and naturally-occurring guanidine from agricultural soils. Plant
Soil 395, 201–214. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-015-2549-7.
Martin-Rueda, I., Muñoz-Guerra, L.M., Yunta, F., Esteban, E., Tenorio, J.L., Lucena, J.J.,
2007. Tillage and crop rotation effects on barley yield and soil nutrients on a
Calciortidic Haploxeralf. Soil Tillage Res. 92,1–9. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
still.2005.10.006.
Martiniello, P., Teixeira da Silva, J.A., 2011. Physiological and bio-agronomical
aspects involved in growth and yield components of cultivated forage species in
Mediterranean environments: a review. Eur. J. Plant Sci. Biotechnol. 5, 64–98.
Masri, Z., Ryan, J., 2006. Soil organic matter and related physical properties in a
Mediterranean wheat-based rotation trial. Soil Tillage Res. 87, 146–154. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2005.03.003.
Meijide, A., Díez, J.A., Sánchez-Martín, L., López-Fernández, S., Vallejo, A., 2007.
Nitrogen oxide emissions from an irrigated maize crop amended with treated
pig slurries and composts in a Mediterranean climate. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
121, 383–394. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2006.11.020.
Meijide, A., García-Torres, L., Arce, A., Vallejo, A., 2009. Nitrogen oxide emissions
affected by organic fertilization in a non-irrigated Mediterranean barley
field.
Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 132, 106–115. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2009.03.005.
Meijide, A., Cárdenas, L.M., Sánchez-Martín, L., Vallejo, A., 2010. Carbon dioxide and
methane
fluxes from a barley
field amended with organic fertilizers under
Mediterranean climatic conditions. Plant Soil 328, 353–367. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11104-009-0114-y.
Meijide, A., Gruening, C., Goded, I., Seufert, G., Cescatti, A., 2017. Water management
reduces greenhouse gas emissions in a Mediterranean rice paddy
field. Agric.
Ecosyst. Environ. 238, 168–178.
Miguez, F.E., Bollero, G.A., 2005. Review of corn yield response under winter cover
cropping systems using meta-analytic methods. Crop Sci. 45, 2318–2329.
Molina-Alcaide, E., Yáñez-Ruiz, D.R., 2008. Potential use of olive by-products in
ruminant feeding: a review. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 147, 247–264.
Naylor, R., Steinfeld, H., Falcon, W., Galloway, J., Smil, V., Bradford, E., Alder, J.,
Mooney, H., 2005. Agriculture. Losing the links between livestock and land.
Science 310 (80), 1621–1622. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1117856.
Nelissen, V., Saha, B.K., Ruysschaert, G., Boeckx, P., 2014. Effect of different biochar
and fertilizer types on N2O and NO emissions. Soil Biol. Biochem. 70, 244–255.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2013.12.026.
Pannell, D.J., 2008. Public benefits, private benefits, and policy mechanism choice
for land-Use change for environmental benefits. Land Econ. 84, 225–240. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3368/le.84.2.225.
Papadakis, J., 1966. Climates of the World and Their Agricultural Potentialities.
DAPCO, Rome, Italy.
Pardo, G., Moral, R., del Prado, A., 2013. Modelling management options of organic
waste for the evaluation of synergies and trade-offs between climate change
mitigation and ecosystem services. Proceeding of the 15th RAMIRAN
International Conference, INRA – Université de Versailles St-Quentin-en-
Yvellines, Versailles.
Pardo, G., Moral, R., Aguilera, E., del Prado, A., 2015. Gaseous emissions from
management of solid waste: a systematic review. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1313–
1327. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12806.
Pardo, G., del Prado, A., Martinez-Mena, M.A., Bustamante, J.A., Rodriguez-Martín, J.,
Alvaro-Fuentes, J., Moral, R., 2017. Orchard and horticulture systems in Spanish
Mediterranean coastal areas: Is there a real possibility to contribute to C
sequestration? Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 238, 153–167.
Parfitt, J., Barthel, M., Macnaughton, S., 2010. Food waste within food supply chains:
quantification and potential for change to 2050. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 365, 3065–3081.
Pellegrino, E., Di Bene, C., Tozzini, C., Bonari, E., 2011. Impact on soil quality of a 10-
year-old short-rotation coppice poplar stand compared with intensive
agricultural and uncultivated systems in a Mediterranean area. Agric. Ecosyst.
Environ. 140, 245–254. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2010.12.011.
Peltre, C., Nyord, T., Bruun, S., Jensen, L.S., Magid, J., 2015. Repeated soil application
of organic waste amendments reduces draught force and fuel consumption for
soil tillage. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 211, 94–101. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2015.06.004.
Penuelas, J., Sardans, J., Alcaniz, J.M., Poch, J.M., 2009. Increased eutrophication and
nutrient imbalances in the agricultural soil of NE Catalonia, Spain. J. Environ.
Biol. 30, 841–846.
Pereira, L.S., Oweis, T., Zairi, A., 2002. Irrigation management under water scarcity.
Agric. Water Manage. 57, 175–206.
Pereira, E.I.P., Suddick, E.C., Mansour, I., Mukome, F.N.D., Parikh, S.J., Scow, K., Six, J.,
2015. Biochar alters nitrogen transformations but has minimal effects on
nitrous oxide emissions in an organically managed lettuce mesocosm. Biol.
Fertil. Soils 51, 573–582. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00374-015-1004-5.
Philibert, A., Loyce, C., Makowski, D., 2012. Assessment of the quality of metaanalysis
in agronomy. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 148, 72–82. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2011.12.003.
Pittelkow, C.M., Linquist, B.A., Lundy, M.E., Liang, X., van Groenigen, K.J., Lee, J., van
Gestel, N., Six, J., Venterea, R.T., van Kessel, C., 2014. When does no-till yield
more? A global meta-analysis. F. Crop. Res. 183, 156–168. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.fcr.2015.07.020.
22 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Cantero-Martínez, C., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., 2010. Tillage effects on
soil aggregation and soil organic carbon profile distribution under
Mediterranean semi-arid conditions. Soil Use Manage. 26, 465–474. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-2743.2010.00298.x.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cantero-Martínez, C., 2013a. Soil aggregate
stability as affected by fertilization type under semiarid no-tillage conditions.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 77 (1), 284–292.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Cantero-Martínez, C., Viñas, P., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., 2013b. Soil
aggregation and organic carbon protection in a no-tillage chronosequence
under Mediterranean conditions. Geoderma 193-194, 76–82. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2012.10.022.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Arrúe, J.L., Cantero-Martínez, C., 2014a. Tillage
and nitrogen fertilization effects on nitrous oxide yield-scaled emissions in a
rainfed Mediterranean area. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 189, 43–52. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.03.023.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Cantero-Martínez, C., Bareche, J., Arrúe, J.L., Álvaro-Fuentes, J.,
2014b. Soil carbon dioxide and methane
fluxes as affected by tillage and N
fertilization in dryland conditions. Plant Soil 381, 111–130. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11104-014-2115-8.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Arrúe, J.L., Cantero-Martínez, C., Fanlo, R., Iglesias, A., Álvaro-
Fuentes, J., 2015. Carbon management in dryland agricultural systems. A review.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 1319–1334. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13593-015-
0326-x.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Nolot, J.-M., Passot, S., Raffaillac, D., Justes, E., 2016. Grain legumebased
rotations managed under conventional tillage need cover crops to
mitigate soil organic matter losses. Soil Tillage Res. 156, 33–43. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2015.09.021.
Poeplau, C., Don, A., 2015. Carbon sequestration in agricultural soils via cultivation
of cover crops – a meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 200, 33–41. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.10.024.
Powlson, D.S., Whitmore, A.P., Goulding, K.W.T., 2011. Soil carbon sequestration to
mitigate climate change: a critical re-examination to identify the true and the
false. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 62, 42–55. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2389.2010.01342.x.
Qiao, C., Liu, L., Hu, S., Compton, J.E., Greaver, T.L., Li, Q., 2015. How inhibiting
nitrification affects nitrogen cycle and reduces environmental impacts of
anthropogenic nitrogen input. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1249–1257. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12802.
Quemada, M., Cabrera, M.L., 2002. Characteristic moisture curves and maximum
water content of two crop residues. Plant Soil 238, 295–299. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/A:1014404003851.
Quemada, M., Baranski, M., Nobel de Lange, M., Vallejo, A., Cooper, J., 2013. Practices
to reduce nitrate leaching and increase nitrogen use efficiency in irrigated
agriculture. General Assembly Conference, Abstracts, Viena, pp. 4472.
Rizzo, A., Boano, F., Revelli, R., Ridolfi, L., 2013. Role of water
flow in modeling
methane emissions from
flooded paddy soils. Adv. Water Resour. 52, 261–274.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.11.016.
Rizzo, A., Boano, F., Revelli, R., Ridolfi, L., 2015. Groundwater impact on methane
emissions from
flooded paddy
fields. Adv. Water Resour. 83, 340–350. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2015.07.005.
Robertson, G., Paul, E., Harwood, R., 2000. Greenhouse gases in intensive
agriculture: contributions of individual gases to the radiative forcing of the
atmosphere. Science 80 (289), 1922–1925. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.289.5486.1922.
Robinson, A., Di, H.J., Cameron, K.C., Podolyan, A., He, J., 2014. The effect of soil pH
and dicyandiamide (DCD) on N2O emissions and ammonia oxidiser abundance
in a stimulated grazed pasture soil. J. Soils Sediments 14, 1434–1444. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11368-014-0888-2.
Rochette, P., 2008. No-till only increases N2O emissions in poorly-aerated soils. Soil
Tillage Res. 101, 97–100. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2008.07.011.
Rochon, J.J., Doyle, C.J., Greef, J.M., Hopkins, A., Molle, G., Sitzia, M., Scholefield, D.,
Smith, C.J., 2004. Grazing legumes in Europe: a review of their status,
management, benefits, research needs and future prospects. Grass Forage Sci.
59, 197–214. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2494.2004.00423.x.
Roelle, P.A., Aneja, V.P., 2002. Nitric oxide emissions from soils amended with
municipal waste biosolids. Atmos. Environ. 36, 137–147. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/s1352-2310(01)00415-0 (METER: http://pub.epsilon.slu.se/671/1/
Agraria482.pdf).
Ryan, J., Ibrikci, H., Sommer, R., McNeill, A., 2009. Chapter 2 nitrogen in rainfed and
irrigated cropping systems in the mediterranean region. Adv. Agron. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113(09)04002-4.
Sáez-Almendros, S., Obrador, B., Bach-Faig, A., Serra-Majem, L., 2013. Environmental
footprints of Mediterranean versus Western dietary patterns: beyond the
health benefits of the Mediterranean diet. Environ. Heal. 12 (118) doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1186/1476-069x-12-118.
Sánchez, B., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cunningham, R., Iglesias, A., 2014. Towards
mitigation of greenhouse gases by small changes in farming practices:
understanding local barriers in Spain. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9562-7.
Sánchez, B., Iglesias, A., McVittie, A., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Ingram, J., Mills, J., Lesschen,
J.P., Kuikman, P.J., 2016. Management of agricultural soils for greenhouse gas
mitigation: learning from a case study in NE Spain. J. Environ. Manage. 170, 37–
49. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.01.003.
Sánchez-García, M., Roig, A., Sánchez-Monedero, M.A., Cayuela, M.L., 2014. Biochar
increases soil N2O emissions produced by nitrification-mediated pathways.
Front. Environ. Sci. 2, 1–10. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2014.00025.
Sánchez-García, M., Sánchez-Monedero, M.A., Roig, A., López-Cano, I., Moreno, B.,
Benitez, E., Cayuela, M.L., 2016. Compost vs biochar amendment: a two-year
field study evaluating soil C build-up and N dynamics in an organically managed
olive crop. Plant Soil doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-016-2794-4.
Sánchez-Girón, V., Serrano, A., Hernanz, J.L., Navarrete, L., 2004. Economic
assessment of three long-term tillage systems for rainfed cereal and legume
production in semiarid central Spain. Soil Tillage Res. 78, 35–44.
Sánchez-Martín, L., Vallejo, A., Dick, J., Skiba, M., 2008. The influence of soluble
carbon and fertilizer nitrogen on nitric oxide and nitrous oxide emissions from
two contrasting agricultural soils. Soil Biol. Biochem. 40, 142–151. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2007.07.016.
Sánchez-Martín, L., Meijide, A., Garcia-Torres, L., Vallejo, A., 2010a. Combination of
drip irrigation and organic fertilizer for mitigating emissions of nitrogen oxides
in semiarid climate. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 137, 99–107. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2010.01.006.
Sánchez-Martín, L., Sanz-Cobena, A., Meijide, A., Quemada, M., Vallejo, A., 2010b.
The importance of the fallow period for N2O and CH4
fluxes and nitrate leaching
in a Mediterranean irrigated agroecosystem. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 61, 710–720. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2389.2010.01278.x.
Sanchis, E., Ferrer, M., Torres, G., Cambra-López, M., Calvet, S., 2012. Effect of water
and straw management practices on methane emissions from rice
fields: a
review through a meta-analysis. Environ. Eng. Sci. 29, 12.
Sans, F.X., Berner, A., Armengot, L., Mäder, P., 2011. Tillage effects on weed
communities in an organic winter wheat-sunflower-spelt cropping sequence.
Weed Res. 51, 413–421. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3180.2011.00859.x.
Santos, A., Bustamante, M.A., Moral, R., Bernal, M.P., 2016. Carbon conservation
strategy for the management of pig slurry by composting: initial study of the
bulking agent influence. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change 21, 1093–1106.
Sanz, A., Misselbrook, T., Sanz, M.J., Vallejo, A., 2010. Use of an inverse dispersion
technique for estimating ammonia emission from surface-applied slurry.
Atmos. Environ. 44, 999–1002.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Misselbrook, T.H., Arce, A., Mingot, J.I., Diez, J.A., Vallejo, A., 2008.
An inhibitor of urease activity effectively reduces ammonia emissions from soil
treated with urea under Mediterranean conditions. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 126,
243–249.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Sánchez-Martín, L., García-Torres, L., Vallejo, A., 2012. Gaseous
emissions of N 2 O and NO and NO 3- leaching from urea applied with urease
and nitrification inhibitors to a maize (Zea mays) crop. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
149, 64–73.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Abalos, D., Meijide, A., Sanchez-Martin, L., Vallejo, A., 2014a. Soil
moisture determines the effectiveness of two urease inhibitors to decrease N2O
emission. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11027-014-9548-5.
Sanz-Cobena, A., García-Marco, S., Quemada, M., Gabriel, J.L., Almendros, P., Vallejo,
A., 2014b. Do cover crops enhance N2O, CO2 or CH4 emissions from soil in
Mediterranean arable systems? Sci. Total Environ. 466-467, 164–174. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.07.023.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Lassaletta, L., Estellés, F., Del Prado, A., Guardia, G., Abalos, D.,
Aguilera, E., Pardo, G., Vallejo, A., Sutton, M.A., Garnier, J., Billen, G., 2014c. Yieldscaled
mitigation of ammonia emission from N fertilization: the Spanish case.
Environ. Res. Lett. 9, 125005. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/9/12/
125005.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Abalos, D., Meijide, A., Sanchez-Martin, L., Vallejo, A., 2016. Soil
moisture determines the effectiveness of two urease inhibitors to decrease N2O
emission. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Chang. 21, 1131–1144. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11027-014-9548-5.
Sasu-Boakye, Y., Cederberg, C., Wirsenius, S., 2014. Localising livestock protein feed
production and the impact on land use and greenhouse gas emissions. Animal 8,
1339–1348. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1751731114001293.
Saviozzi, A., Levi-Minzi, R., Cardelli, R., Biasci, A., Riffaldi, R., 2001. Suitability of
moist olive pomace as soil amendment. Water. Air. Soil Pollut. 128, 13–22. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1010361807181.
Schellenberg, D.L., Alsina, M.M., Muhammad, S., Stockert, C.M., Wolff, M.W., Sanden,
B.L., Brown, P.H., Smart, D.R., 2012. Yield-scaled global warming potential from
N2O emissions and CH4 oxidation for almond (Prunus dulcis) irrigated with
nitrogen fertilizers on arid land. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.155, 7–15. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2012.03.008.
Shcherbak, I., Millar, N., Robertson, G.P., 2014. Global metaanalysis of the nonlinear
response of soil nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions to fertilizer nitrogen. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 111, 9199–9204. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1322434111.
Sisquella, M., Lloveras, J., Álvaro, J., Santiveri, P., Cantero, C. 2004. Técnicas de cultivo
para la producción de maíz, trigo y alfalfa en regadíos del valle del Ebro.
Proyecto TRAMA-LIFE. Ed. Fundació Catalana de Cooperació, Lleida, Spain. pp.
105. ISBN: 8468878669.
Six, J., Bossuyt, H., Degryze, S., Denef, K., 2004. A history of research on the link
between (micro)aggregates, soil biota, and soil organic matter dynamics. Soil
Tillage Res. 79, 7–31. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2004.03.008.
SmartSOIL, 2015. SmartSOIL Fact sheets providing technical and economic
information on
five practices that promote good soil carbon management: crop
rotation, residue management, adding manure or compost, cover and catch
crops, and conservation agriculture. EU-FP7 SmartSOIL Project – 289694, .
http://smartsoil.eu/smartsoil-toolbox/factsheets/.
Smith, P., Olesen, J.E., 2010. Synergies between the mitigation of, and adaptation to,
climate change in agriculture. J. Agric. Sci. 148, 543–552. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1017/s0021859610000341.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 23
Snyder, C.S., Bruulsema, T.W., Jensen, T.L., Fixen, P.E., 2009. Review of greenhouse gas
emissions from crop production systems and fertilizer management effects.
Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 133, 247–266. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2009.04.021.
Soane, B.D., Ball, B.C., Arvidsson, J., Basch, G., Moreno, F., Roger-Estrade, J., 2012. No-
till in northern, western and south-western Europe: a review of problems and
opportunities for crop production and the environment. Soil Tillage Res. 118,
66–87. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2011.10.015.
Song, U., Lee, E.J., 2010. Environmental and economical assessment of sewage sludge
compost application on soil and plants in a landfill. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 54,
1109–1116. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2010.03.005.
Soussana, J.-F., Lemaire, G., 2014. Coupling carbon and nitrogen cycles for
environmentally sustainable intensification of grasslands and crop-livestock
systems. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 190, 9–17. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2013.10.012.
Spinelli, R., Picchi, G., 2010. Industrial harvesting of olive tree pruning residue for
energy biomass. Bioresour. Technol. 101, 730–735. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2009.08.039.
Suddick, E.C., Six, J., 2013. An estimation of annual nitrous oxide emissions and soil
quality following the amendment of high temperature walnut shell biochar and
compost to a small scale vegetable crop rotation. Sci. Total Environ. 465, 298–
307. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.094.
Suddick, E.C., Scow, K.M., Horwath, W.R., Jackson, L.E., Smart, D.R., Mitchell, J., Six, J.,
2010. The potential for california agricultural crop soils to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. Adv. Agron. 123–162. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113
(10)07004-5.
Sutton, M.A., Howard, C., Reis, S., Abalos, D., Bracher, A., Bryukhanov, A., Condor-
Golec, R.D., Kozlova, N., Lalor, S.T.J., Menzi, H., Maximov, D., Misselbrook, T.,
Raaflaub, M., Sanz-Cobena, A., von Atzigen-Sollberger, E., Spring, P., Vallejo, A.,
Wade, B., 2015. Country case studies. In: Reis, S., Howard, C., Sutton, M.A., Stefan,
R., Howard, C., Sutton, M. (Eds.), Costs of Ammonia Abatement and the Climate
Co-Benefits. Springer, Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 169–231. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-017-9722-1_8.
Tarrasón, D., Ojeda, G., Ortiz, O., Alcañiz, J.M., 2008. Differences on nitrogen
availability in a soil amended with fresh, composted and thermally-dried
sewage sludge. Bioresour. Technol. 99, 252–259. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2006.12.023.
Tate, K.R., 2015. Soil methane oxidation and land-use change -from process to
mitigation. Soil Biol. Biochem. 80, 260–272. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
soilbio.2014.10.010.
Teira-Esmatges, M.R., Flotats, X., 2003. A method for livestock waste management
planning in NE Spain. Waste Manag. 23, 917–932.
Tellez-Rio, A., García-Marco, S., Navas, M., López-Solanilla, E., Tenorio, J.L., Vallejo, A.,
2015. N2O and CH4 emissions from a fallow-wheat rotation with low N input in
conservation and conventional tillage under a Mediterranean agroecosystem.
Sci. Total Environ. 508, 85–94. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2014.11.041.
Thompson, T.L., Doerge, T.A., Godin, R.E., 2000. Nitrogen and water interactions in
subsurface drip-irrigated cauliflower II. Agron. Econ. Environ. Outcomes Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. J. 64, 406–411.
Thorman, R.E., Chadwick, D.R., Harrison, R., Boyles, L.O., Matthews, R., 2007. The
effect on N2O emissions of storage conditions and rapid incorporation of pig
and cattle farmyard manure into tillage land. Biosyst. Eng. 97, 501–511. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2007.03.039.
Timilsena, Y.P., Adhikari, R., Casey, P., Muster, T., Gill, H., Adhikari, B., 2015. Enhanced
efficiency fertilisers: a review of formulation and nutrient release patterns. J.
Sci. Food Agric. 95, 1131–1142. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.6812.
Tonitto, C., David, M.B., Drinkwater, L.E., 2006. Replacing bare fallows with cover
crops in fertilizer-intensive cropping systems: a meta-analysis of crop yield and
N dynamics. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 112, 58–72.
Triberti, L., Nastri, A., Baldoni, G., 2016. Long-term effects of crop rotation, manure
and mineral fertilisation on carbon sequestration and soil fertility. Eur. J. Agron.
74, 47–55. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.11.024 (METER REF http://
thericejournal.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/1939-8433-5-5).
Vallejo, A., García-Torres, L., Díez, J.A., Arce, A., López-Fernández, S., 2005.
Comparison of N losses (NO
3, N 2O, NO) from surface applied, injected or
amended (DCD) pig slurry of an irrigated soil in a Mediterranean climate. Plant
Soil 272, 313–325. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-004-5754-3.
Vallejo, A., Meijide, A., Boeckx, P., Arce, A., García-torres, L., Aguado, P.L., Sanchezmartin,
L., 2014. Nitrous oxide and methane emissions from a surface dripirrigated
system combined with fertilizer management. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 65, 386–
395. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejss.12140.
van Grinsven, H.J.M., Spiertz, J.H.J., Westhoek, H.J., Bouwman, A.F., Erisman, J.W.,
2014. Nitrogen use and food production in European regions from a global
perspective. J. Agric. Sci. 152, 9–19. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
s0021859613000853.
van Grinsven, H.J.M., Erisman, J.W., de Vries, W., Westhoek, H., 2015. Potential of
extensification of European agriculture for a more sustainable food system,
focusing on nitrogen. Environ. Res. Lett. 10, 025002. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1088/1748-9326/10/2/025002.
VanderZaag, A.C., Jayasundara, S., Wagner-Riddle, C., 2011. Strategies to mitigate
nitrous oxide emissions from land applied manure. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol.
166-167, 464–479. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anifeedsci.2011.04.034.
Vanham, D., Bouraoui, F., Leip, A., Grizzetti, B., Bidoglio, G., 2015. Lost water and
nitrogen resources due to EU consumer food waste. Environ. Res. Lett. 10,
084008. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084008.
Veenstra, J.J., Horwath, W.R., Mitchell, J.P., 2007. Tillage and cover cropping effects
on aggregate-protected carbon in cotton and tomato. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 71,
362–371.
Velthof, G., Kuikman, P., Oenema, O., 2003. Nitrous oxide emission from animal
manures applied to soil under controlled conditions. Biol. Fertil. Soils 37, 221–
230. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00374-003-0589-2.
Viguria, M., Sanz-Cobeña, A., López, D.M., Arriaga, H., Merino, P., 2015. Ammonia and
greenhouse gases emission from impermeable covered storage and land
application of cattle slurry to bare soil. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 199, 261–271.
Webb, J., Chadwick, D., Ellis, S., 2004. Emissions of ammonia and nitrous oxide
following rapid incorporation of farmyard manures stored at different densities.
Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst. 70, 67–76.
Webb, J., Pain, B., Bittman, S., Morgan, J., 2010. The impacts of manure application
methods on emissions of ammonia, nitrous oxide and on crop response—a
review. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 137, 39–46. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2010.01.001.
Westhoek, H.,Lesschen, J.P.,Rood, T., Wagner, S., De Marco,A., Murphy-Bokern,D., Leip,
A., van Grinsven, H., Sutton, M.A., Oenema, O., 2014. Food choices, health and
environment: effects of cutting Europe's meat and dairy intake. Glob. Environ.
Change 26, 196–205. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.02.004.
Woolf, D., Amonette, J.E., Street-Perrott, F.A., Lehmann, J., Joseph, S., 2010.
Sustainable biochar to mitigate global climate change. Nat. Commun. 1,1–9. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1053.
Yagüe, M.R., Quílez, D., 2010. Cumulative and residual effects of swine slurry and
mineral nitrogen in irrigated maize. Agron. J. 102, 1682. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.2134/agronj2010.0282.
Yagüe, M.R., Quílez, D., 2015. Pig slurry residual effects on maize yields and nitrate
leaching: a study in lysimeters. Agron. J. 107, 278. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj14.0171.
Yagi, K., Tsuruta, H., Minami, K., 1997. Possible options for mitigating methane
emission from rice cultivation. Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst. 49, 213–220. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1009743909716.
Zavattaro, L., Monaco, S., Sacco, D., Grignani, C., 2012. Options to reduce N loss from
maize in intensive cropping systems in Northern Italy. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
147, 24–35.
=======
Strategies for greenhouse gas emissions mitigation in Mediterranean
agriculture: A review
A. Sanz-Cobenaa,*, L. Lassalettab, E. Aguilerac, A. del Pradod, J. Garniere,f, G. Billene,f,
A. Iglesiasa, B. Sáncheza, G. Guardiaa, D. Abalosg, D. Plaza-Bonillah,
I. Puigdueta-Bartoloméa, R. Morali, E. Galánd, H. Arriagaj, P. Merinoj, J. Infante-Amatec,
A. Meijidek, G. Pardod, J. Álvaro-Fuentesl, C. Gilsanzm, D. Báezm, J. Doltran,
S. González-Ubiernao, M.L. Cayuelap, S. Menéndezq, E. Díaz-Pinésr, J. Le-Noëf,
M. Quemadaa, F. Estelléss, S. Calvets, H.J.M. van Grinsvenb, H. Westhoekb, M.J. Sanzd,
B.S. Gimenot, A. Vallejoa, P. Smithu
a ETSI Agronomos, Technical University of Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain
b PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, PO Box 30314, 2500 GH The Hague, The Netherlands
c Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Ctra. de Utrera, km. 1, 41013, Sevilla, Spain
d Basque Centre for Climate Change (BC3), Edificio Sede No 1, Planta 1a, Parque Científico de UPV/EHU, Barrio Sarriena s/n, 48940 Leioa (Bizkaia), Spain
e CNRS, UMR Metis 7619, BP105, 4 place Jussieu, 75005, Paris, France
f UPMC, UMR Metis 7619, BP105, 4 place Jussieu, 75005, Paris, France
g Department of Soil Quality, Wageningen University, PO Box 47, Droevendaalsesteeg 4, Wageningen 6700AA, The Netherlands
h INRA, UMR-AGIR, 24 Chemin de Borde Rouge – Auzeville, CS 52627, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan cedex, France
i Department of Agrochemistry and Environment, EPSO, Miguel Hernandez University, 03312 Orihuela, Alicante, Spain
j NEIKER-Tecnalia, Conservation of Natural Resources, Bizkaia Technology Park, P. 812, 48160, Derio, Bizkaia, Spain
k Bioclimatology, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Büsgenweg 2, 37077, Göttingen, Germany
l Soil and Water Dpt, Estación, Experimental de Aula Dei (EEAD), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Av. Montañana, 1005, 50059 Zaragoza, Spain
mMabegondo Agricultural Research Centre (CIAM-INGACAL), Xunta de Galicia, Carretera AC-542 de Betanzos a Mesón do Vento, km 7, 15318 Abegondo, A
Coruña, Spain
n Cantabrian Agricultural Research and Training Centre, CIFA, c/Héroes 2 de Mayo 27, 39600 Muriedas, Spain
o Faculty of Pharmacy, Complutense University of Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, Pza. Ramón y Cajal s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain
p Departamento de Conservación de Suelos y Aguas y Manejo de Residuos Orgánicos, CEBAS-CSIC, Campus Universitario de Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain
q University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Department of Plant Biology and Ecology, Apdo. 644, 48080, Bilbao, Spain
r Institute of Meteorology and Climate Research, Atmospheric Environmental Research, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Kreuzeckbahnstr. 19, 82467
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany
s ICTA, Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n 46022, Valencia, Spain
t Ecotoxicology of Air Pollution, CIEMAT. Avda. Complutense 22, 28040 Madrid, Spain
u Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 23 St Machar Drive,Aberdeen, AB24 3UU, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Article history:
Received 21 April 2016
Received in revised form 28 September 2016
Accepted 30 September 2016
Available online 5 December 2016
Keywords:
Cropping systems
GHG
Mitigation
Mediterranean climate
Review
A B S T R A C T
An integrated assessment of the potential of different management practices for mitigating specific
components of the total GHG budget (N2O and CH4 emissions and C sequestration) of Mediterranean
agrosystems was performed in this study. Their suitability regarding both yield and environmental (e.g.
nitrate leaching and ammonia volatilization) sustainability, and regional barriers and opportunities for
their implementation were also considered. Based on its results best strategies to abate GHG emissions in
Mediterranean agro-systems were proposed. Adjusting N fertilization to crop needs in both irrigated and
rain-fed systems could reduce N2O emissions up to 50% compared with a non-adjusted practice.
Substitution of N synthetic fertilizers by solid manure can be also implemented in those systems, and
may abate N2O emissions by about 20% under Mediterranean conditions, with additional indirect
benefits associated to energy savings and positive effects in crop yields. The use of urease and nitrification
inhibitors enhances N use efficiency of the cropping systems and may mitigate N2O emissions up to 80%
and 50%, respectively. The type of irrigation may also have a great mitigation potential in the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: a.sanz@upm.es (A. Sanz-Cobena).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.09.038
0167-8809/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment
journal homepage: www.elsev ier.com/locate /agee
Mediterranean region. Drip-irrigated systems have on average 80% lower N2O emissions than sprinkler
systems and drip-irrigation combined with optimized fertilization showed a reduction in direct N2O
emissions up to 50%. Methane
fluxes have a relatively small contribution to the total GHG budget of
Mediterranean crops, which can mostly be controlled by careful management of the water table and
organic inputs in paddies. Reduced soil tillage, improved management of crop residues and agro-industry
by-products, and cover cropping in orchards, are the most suitable interventions to enhance organic C
stocks in Mediterranean agricultural soils. The adoption of the proposed agricultural practices will
require farmers training. The global analysis of life cycle emissions associated to irrigation type (drip,
sprinkle and furrow) and N fertilization rate (100 and 300 kg N ha1 yr1) revealed that these factors may
outweigh the reduction in GHG emissions beyond the plot scale. The analysis of the impact of some
structural changes on top-down mitigation of GHG emissions revealed that 3–15% of N2O emissions could
be suppressed by avoiding food waste at the end-consumer level. A 40% reduction in meat and dairy
consumption could reduce GHG emissions by 20–30%. Reintroducing the Mediterranean diet (i.e.
35%
intake of animal protein) would therefore result in a significant decrease of GHG emissions from
agricultural production systems under Mediterranean conditions.
© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Mediterranean climate, found from 20 latitude onwards, is
characterized by having mild winters and warm summers.
Precipitation during summer period, when highest temperatures
occur, is scarce, so most summer crops require irrigation to achieve
worthwhile yields. Mediterranean climate is neither desert
climate, nor humid, and three subtypes can be distinguished:
humid or rainy Mediterranean (Ln – Seasonal rainfall surplus –
higher than 20% of annual PET – potential evapotranspiration); dry
Mediterranean, and semiarid Mediterranean (drier than dry
Mediterranean climate) (Ln < 20% PET) (Papadakis, 1966). Over
one half of the area with Mediterranean-type climate worldwide is
found in the Mediterranean Sea Basin (Aschmann, 1973), but it is
also present in four other regions of the world namely California
(USA), Central Chile, the Cape region of South Africa, and South-
West Australia (Fig. 1).
In the case of Mediterranean agricultural systems, the temporal
gap between maximum irradiance and temperature (early
summer) and maximum water availability (winter), added to
the low organic matter (OM) content of most cropped soils, are
important drivers of the typically low productivity of rain-fed
crops. On the contrary, irrigated agriculture benefits from the solar
radiation and extended frost-free periods to make these areas
capable of high crops yields. The different soil conditions between
irrigated and rain-fed crops greatly affect soil microbial processes,
which control the
fluxes of C (carbon dioxide, CO2; methane, CH4;
organic carbon) and N (nitrous oxide, N2O; molecular nitrogen, N2;
nitrate, NO3
; ammonia, NH3) in soil.
Pedoclimatic conditions shape soil processes in Mediterranean
cropping systems, leading to different N2O emission patterns
compared to temperate soils (Aguilera et al., 2013b). Nitrification
and nitrifier-denitrification, and not denitrification, are very often
the main pathways leading to emissions of N oxides in rain-fed
Mediterranean cropping system (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2008; Kool
et al., 2011; Aguilera et al., 2013b; Vallejo et al., 2014). These two
processes are favoured by conditions of soil water content (i.e.,
water
filled pore space, WFPS) under saturation (i.e. 40–60%
WFPS). Denitrification may play a predominant role in anaerobic
soil microsites (Davidson et al., 1991) in intensively managed and
irrigated systems (e.g., Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012, 2014c). Consequently,
different cumulative N2O emissions have been proposed
for rain-fed crops (0.7 kg N2ON ha1 yr1) and for e.g., sprinkler
irrigated crops in Mediterranean areas (4.4 kg N2ON ha1 yr1)
Fig. 1. Regions of the world with Mediterranean climate.
6 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
(Cayuela et al., 2017). Thus, the importance and potential for N2O
mitigation and the best mitigation strategy differ greatly depending
on the cropping system.
Paddy soils account for 6% of the total CH4 emissions from
Mediterranean agriculture (Tate, 2015). Large CH4 emissions in
these
flooded soils are generated through methanogenesis under
strict anaerobic conditions and low oxido-reduction potentials (Le
Mer and Roger, 2001). On the contrary, aerobic agricultural soils,
both rain-fed and irrigated, promote CH4 oxidation, which is very
dependent on management practices such as N fertilization.
Agricultural management strategies based on reducing methanogenesis
in paddy soils, or enhancement of CH4 oxidation in aerated
soils, are often ignored in Mediterranean agriculture, yet they may
contribute substantially to reduce total GHG emissions from these
systems.
Increasing the generally low C content of Mediterranean soils is
an important GHG mitigation strategy (Robertson et al., 2000), and
is also a priority for preventing erosion and improving soil quality.
In this review we have synthesized and analyzed the perfor-
mance of agronomic GHG mitigation practices in Mediterranean
cropping systems aiming to i) decrease soil N2O emissions; ii)
enhance CH4 oxidation and decrease CH4 emission rates; iii)
enhance soil organic C stocks and iv) reduce or leave unchanged
other sources of environmental pollution (e.g. NH3 volatilization
and NO3
 leaching). The effect on the total GHG budget of the
selected strategies was also analyzed to establish an order of
priority. The review also includes an assessment of the socioeconomic
performance of agronomic measures and constraints to
implementation. Finally, we explored the potential of structural
measures at the agro-food system scale for reducing GHGs
emissions: i) food waste reduction, ii) change in the composition
of human diet, particularly in the proportion of animal products,
and iii) reconnection between crops and livestock at farm or
regional scale for optimization of resource use.
2. Agronomic mitigation measures
2.1. Agronomic practices affecting N2O emissions
As previously explained, Mediterranean climatic conditions
lead to the existence of two main contrasting production systems,
rain-fed and irrigated, largely differing in terms of crop management
and, consequently, N2O emission processes. Rain-fed
systems, mostly based on winter crops, are characterized by
periods with low soil moisture and cold temperatures, thus with
decreased soil microbiological activity and N2O
fluxes. The IPCC
(2006) has proposed a 1% emission factor (EF, i.e. the percentage of
fertilizer N applied that is transformed and emitted back to the
atmosphere as N2O) at Tier 1 (Tier 1 default EF1 proposed by IPCC,
2006) for N2O emissions. However, two recent reviews have shown
that N2O emission factors from rain-fed Mediterranean cropping
systems are much lower than the default 1% (i.e. Aguilera et al.,
2013b; Cayuela et al., 2017). Irrigated systems receive large
amounts of water and N inputs which create favorable soil
conditions for N2O production. Emission factors in these systems
fluctuate greatly according to water management and the type and
amount of fertilizer used (e.g., synthetic, solid or liquid manures).
Sprinkler irrigated crops led to a N2O EF similar to those of
temperate areas of about 1%; conversely, drip irrigated systems
emit at a much lower rate (0.18) (Cayuela et al., 2017).
2.1.1. Nitrogen fertilization
Optimized N fertilizers application (in terms of input rate and
time of application), as well as the careful selection of the type of
fertilizer used are crucial to reduce N2O emissions. Synthetic and
organic fertilizers are the most widespread sources of environ-
mental N contamination in Mediterranean areas with dense
concentration of livestock, due to the losses of N coming from
unadjusted fertilizer application (e.g., Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b).
An additional mitigation effect could be achieved by applying
already existing N (organic fertilizer) when possible or with the use
of nitrification and urease inhibitors.
2.1.1.1. Adjusting N fertilization to crop needs. Recommendations on
N application rates, based on a careful estimation of crop needs,
aim to achieve optimum yields while reducing N pollution.
Reduction of N rates according to soil N availability and crop
yield potential may decrease N surpluses and subsequent direct
and indirect N2O emissions, while saving energy and abating other
GHG emissions (e.g. associated to manufacturing synthetic
fertilizers). Current national emission inventory methods mostly
use the 1% Tier 1 EF (IPCC, 2006). However, many studies
concluded that the response of direct N2O emission to N input
is non-linear (Philibert et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2013; Shcherbak
et al., 2014), and other management factors, as constrained by
climate, must be considered in determining N2O emissions
(Bouwman et al., 2002; Leip et al., 2011; Lesschen et al., 2011;
Aguilera et al., 2013a). For example, significant effects of N
application timing on N2O emissions have been reported from
cereal crops in Mediterranean countries such as Spain (Abalos
et al., 2016). The estimated N2O mitigation potential, through
adjusted fertilization (rate and timing) in Mediterranean agroecosystems
ranges between 30 and 50% compared to a nonadjusted
practice (Table 1).
2.1.1.2. Substituting synthetic fertilizers by organic
fertilizers. Differences among fertilizer N sources in N2O
emissions depend on site- and weather-specific conditions
(Snyder et al., 2009). Replacing mineral N with organic
fertilization provides not only NPK and micronutrients to the
soil and crop, but also organic C when using solid fertilizers (i.e.,
solid manure, composts, etc.), which is highly beneficial in
Mediterranean soils with low organic C contents (Aguilera et al.,
2013b). In areas were croplands co-exist with livestock farms,
using a farm sub-product allows the reuse/recovery of farm
products, thus decreasing the volume of waste that needs to be
managed, and then avoiding the emission of GHG both in the
management of such wastes and in the manufacturing of new
synthetic fertilizers. In Mediterranean areas, the efficient use of
manure of fertilizer should beencouraged, and this could be
facilitated by increased cooperation between farmer's unions.
Mineral N is released slowly when solid organic fertilizers are
used so N delivery can be better coupled with crop needs over time.
This may decrease the need of synthetic fertilizers, thus saving
energy and avoiding emissions produced beyond the boundaries of
the farm during the industrial Haber-Bosch process of N
fixation. In
contrast, since the N content of manures is normally lower than
that of synthetic fertilizers, the amount of organic matter to be
applied in order to fulfil crop needs is high, so an increase in
transport expenses and emissions would be expected unless
manures are applied nearby the source.
Replacing synthetic fertilizers with organic ones is applicable to
field crops such as cereals and oilseeds, given their high N demand.
It is applicable to both irrigated and rain-fed systems, under
Mediterranean conditions. Medium-textured and well-drained
soils are the most suitable for this practice since they can
counterbalance the N2O denitrification losses associated to high C-
1 EF1 for N additions from mineral fertilizers, organic amendments and crop
residues, and N mineralised from mineral soil as a result of loss of soil carbon. TABLE
11.1, IPCC (2006) National GHG Inventory Guidelines. Volume IV (AFOLU), Chapter
11.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 7
content organic amendments (Velthof et al., 2003), whereas
poorly-aerated soils tend to stimulate denitrification (Rochette,
2008). Technical issues related to temporal and spatial availability
of animal manures must be considered. Intensive livestock
production systems are often decoupled from agricultural systems.
This causes mismatches between manure production and crop
requirements, resulting in manure excess at a local scale. Thus,
manure has to be transported to longer distances and/or treated
before being applied, resulting in higher manure management
costs (Teira-Esmatges and Flotats, 2003; Flotats et al., 2009).
The N2O emission reduction at plot scale depends on the form
of manure used. Solid manures have proved to significantly
decrease N2O emissions (ca. 23%) in Mediterranean systems
(Aguilera et al., 2013b) and to have the potential to increase C
sequestration in the long term (Ding et al., 2012). Webb et al.
(2004) observed that solid manure incorporation decreased N2O
Table 1
GHG mitigation performance, costs and benefits and side-effects of agronomic practices in Mediterranean cropping systems.
Group of measures Mitigation measure Direct GHG
abated
% of
mitigation
Potential
cost (2)
Potential
benefit
(2)
Potential positive and negative side-effects (3)
Other pollutant on farm
GHG
mitigation
out farm
GHG
increase
outside the
farm
Reduced
pollutant
Increased
pollutant
Crop yield
change on
farm
Agronomic measures (1)
Optimal
fertilization
Adjust N fertilization
to crop needs
N2O 30–50 ** ***** Indirect N2O NO3
, NH3 No effect
Fertigation N2O 30–50 *** **** Indirect N2O NO3
 Increase
Substitute synthetic
fertilizers by manures
N2O 20–50 ** **** Indirect N2O,
CO2
CH4 P, NOx, C
sequestration
NH3,
heavy
metals
No effect
Manures and
slurries
Injection of slurries C seq. 010 **** ** Indirect N2O NH3 NO3
, CH4 Decrease
Immediate
incorporation of
manures after
application
C seq./N2O 010 ** ** Indirect N2O NH3 NO3
, CH4 Increase
Inhibitors Use of nitrification
inhibitors
N2O 30–50 **** *** Indirect N2O CO2
c NO, NO3
 NH3 Increasea
Use of urease
inhibitors
N2O 30–60 **** *** Indirect N2O CO2
c NO, NH3 Increase
Crop Rotations and
cover crops
Cover crops C seq. 010 ** *** CO2
c/Indirect
N2O
NH3, NO3
, P Variable
Crop Rotations C seq. – * *** CO2
c – – Increase
Irrigation Improved Irrigation
technology
N2O/CH4
b 50–70 ** *** Indirect N2O NO3
 NO, CH4
b Increase
Soil tillage Low/no tillage C seq. – ** *** CO2
c NO3, NH3 N2O Increase
Crop residues and
agro-industry
by-products
Crop residues
mulching
C seq. 50–70 * ** CO2
c NH3 Long-term
increase
Crop residues
incorporation
C seq. 50–70 * * CO2
c NH3 CH4
d Long-term
increase
Use of by-products C seq. 50–70 * ** CO2
c NH3 Long-term
increase
Composted sewage
sludge
Application of
composted sewage
sludge
C seq. *** *** CO2
c Heavy metals CO2, NO
Biochar Use of biochar C seq./N2O 050 *** *** Indirect N2O,
CO2
CO2
c NO3

, Heavy
metals
Variable
Structural measures (1)
Reducing food waste C seq./N2O *** GHG indirect NO3
, NH3;
NOx
Non-
applicable
Reduction of animal
protein consumption
C seq./N2O 20–30 *** GHG indirect NO3
, NH3,
NOX
Non-
applicable
Reconnect crop and
livestock areas
C seq./N2O Variable GHG indirect NO3
, NH3 Variable
(1) Agronomic (existing or new technical implementation), or structural (change in social behaviour or agronomic organization); (2) Costs and benefits: From 1 (very low) to 5
(very high), based on expert judge and existing literature; (3) Potential positive and negative side effects.
aDMPP appears not to affect yield but DCD may provide a slight yield increase (5–10%).
b CH4 oxidation favoured.
c CO2 due to energy consumption/transport.
d emissions in paddy soils due to straw addition.
8 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
emissions, but Thorman et al. (2007) found no consistent effect of
incorporation of pig or cattle farmyard manure on such losses,
except when denitrification is likely to be intense. However, as the
readily-degradable C is mainly lost during the storage stage of solid
manures, the C added to soil by incorporation will have less effect
on the metabolism of denitrifiers (Webb et al., 2010). Overall,
incorporation of solid manure in Mediterranean regions appears to
reduce or have no impact on N2O emissions (Table 1).
For liquid manures (i.e., slurries), no significant differences have
been observed when these substitute synthetic N sources. This
seems to be a consequence of the strong similarities between
available N, in the form of NH4
+, in both fertilizer types (Meijide
et al., 2009; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2014a). Other studies indicate that
the method of slurry application is a key variable driving N2O
emissions from agricultural soils. According to a meta-analysis by
Hou et al. (2015), injection of slurry could significantly increase
direct emissions compared with broadcast application. However,
in Mediterranean areas, dry matter content of slurries under dry
weather conditions is normally high, thus reducing the potential of
implementing injection practices. In cases of implementation, soil
conditions appear to be the key factor affecting the direct and
indirect N2O emission pattern after slurry injection (VanderZaag
et al., 2011). The addition of readily-mineralizable C from slurry has
been shown to be the main driver for increasing emissions of N2O
by denitrifiers (Webb et al., 2010). If slurries are applied to crops, a
social constraint related to smells and health issues may arise (Cole
et al., 2000). This could be alleviated by restricting their use near
towns or populated areas. Additionally, accumulation of heavy
metals in the soil (e.g., zinc and copper present in animal diet) may
represent a barrier for using these organic materials (Berenguer
et al., 2008) (Table 2). There are also risks of antibiotic
contamination of soils, and leaching when using manure (Díaz-
Cruz, 2003).
2.1.1.3. Nitrification and urease inhibitors. Nitrification inhibitors
(NIs) deactivate the enzyme responsible for the
first step of
nitrification, the oxidation of NH4
+ to NO2
. By reducing
nitrification rates, and subsequently the substrate for
denitrification, the use of NIs may lead to reductions of N2O
emissions ranging from 30 to 50% (Huérfano et al., 2015) (Table 1).
Nitrification inhibitors are used in a wide range of agro-climatic
regions (Akiyama et al., 2010; Gilsanz et al., 2016). In Mediterra-
nean soils, NIs have shown high mitigation efficiency in rain-fed
and irrigated
fields, with a likely indirect effect on denitrification in
the latter systems (Meijide et al., 2010). Soil texture may regulate
mitigation efficiency (Barth et al., 2008) but to a limited extent,
since soil texture has been shown to have a small influence on the
inhibition of nitrification (Gilsanz et al., 2016)
Other soil parameters such as pH (with better performance in
acidic soils) or organic C may affect the efficacy of NIs (Robinson
et al., 2014; Marsden et al., 2015), especially for dicyandiamide
(DCD), which explains the high efficiencies reported by studies
performed in low-C Mediterranean soils. An inverse relationship
between the inhibitory effect and temperature has also been
described (Gilsanz et al., 2016), and should be considered when
choosing the optimum application timing in each season.
The main limitation for implementation of NIs is the increase of
fertilization costs (Timilsena et al., 2015). This could be counter-
balanced by an increment in crop productivity (Abalos et al.,
2014a). A potential enhancement in crop N use efficiency (Abalos
et al., 2014a) may reduce N losses and may thus decrease the rate of
synthetic N applied, reducing fertilization costs. Moreover, the use
of inhibitors could simplify the task of fertilization by reducing the
number of required applications, or by allowing for a greater
flexibility in the timing of fertilizer application (Linzmeier et al.,
2001).
Urease inhibitors (UIs) are used to reduce the activity of the
urea hydrolase enzyme. Therefore, they can only be used when
urea or urea-containing fertilizers (including organic sources) are
used. Originally developed to reduce NH3 volatilization, recent
research has shown that these products may also reduce N2O
emissions (Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012, 2016). Among the various
types of UIs available, N-(n-butyl) thiophosphorictriamide (NBPT)
has received the greatest commercial use (Sanz-Cobena et al.,
2008; Abalos et al., 2014a). Recent studies have evaluated the
effectiveness of NBPT to abate N2O emissions in Mediterranean
cropping systems, showing a high mitigation potential in an
irrigated maize-field with nitrification-favoring conditions (55%;
Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012), and in a rain-fed barley crop (86%;
Abalos et al., 2012). An incubation experiment confirmed that the
efficacy of the inhibitor to abate N2O emissions is realized under
conditions of low soil moisture (WFPS

55%) (Sanz-Cobena et al.,
2016), common in Mediterranean semi-arid areas due to the scarce
rainfall. The efficiency of UIs is expected to be highest in alkaline
soils (frequent in Mediterranean climates), and is also generally
higher in coarse-textured soils and at high N fertilization rates
(Abalos et al., 2014a).
A cost-benefit analysis showed that mitigated N due to
reductions in NH3 volatilization when UIs are employed may
serve to reduce fertilizer-N rates without incurring yield penalties
(Sutton et al., 2015) (Table 1). The N rate reduction would decrease
total fertilizer costs and partially offset the higher cost of urea
treated with UIs. Further, reduced N rates may have additional
environmental benefits such as reduction in NO3
-leaching.
However, such
findings were obtained from studies in temperate
climate, and remain to be confirmed under Mediterranean
conditions.
2.1.2. Irrigation technology
Soil moisture, expressed as WFPS, is a key factor affecting N2O
losses (del Prado et al., 2006; García-Marco et al., 2014), hence the
potential for N2O mitigation linked to irrigation technologies is
high (even above 50%) (e.g., Sánchez-Martín et al., 2008, 2010a;
Guardia et al., 2016) (Table 1). The lower amounts of water applied
in subsurface drip irrigation (SDI) or normal/superficial drip
irrigation (DI) through more frequent irrigation events, generate
“dry” and “wet” areas in the soil, lowering the overall soil moisture
and favoring nitrification over denitrification (Sánchez-Martín
et al., 2010a), thus reducing N2O emissions (Table 1). Drip irrigation
systems have shown an N2O EF of only 0.18%, compared to an EF of
1% in sprinkler systems (SI), showing the mitigation potential of
irrigation technologies in the Mediterranean region (Cayuela et al.,
2017).
Optimized irrigation techniques to decrease GHG emissions on
Mediterranean regions are particularly used in perennial crops and
intensive vegetable cropping systems (SDI, DI), and in paddy soils
(water table management).
Subsurface drip irrigation has been shown to be beneficial in
terms of increased yield, improved crop quality, and reduced
agronomic costs (e.g., for weed control or water applied) (Ayars
et al., 2015), but there are some technical and economic
constraints associated with conversion, automation and mainte-
nance. Indeed, the use of different irrigation systems results in
distinct water use patterns. This is particularly important in
Mediterranean systems, where irrigation needs to be optimized,
due to limited water resources during summer crop growth
periods. The most efficient irrigation system from the water use
perspective is subsurface drip irrigation (SDI), followed by
normal/superficial drip irrigation (DI) and sprinkler (SI). In
contrast, whereas furrow irrigation (FI) results in the highest
water consumption rates, thus coincident with N2O mitigation
technology.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 9
2.1.3. Fertigation
Irrigation combined with split application of N fertilizerdissolved
intheirrigationwater(i.e.,fertigation)isideallysuitedforcontrolling
the placement, time and rate of fertilizer N application, thereby
increasing N use efficiency. This fertilization strategy is highly
relevant in a context of increasing drought periods due to climate
change in Mediterranean agro-ecosystems (Abalos et al., 2014b).
Reductions in direct N2O emissions between 30 and 50% compared
with traditional fertilization and irrigation practices have been
reported for Mediterranean fertigated crops, mostly due to an effect
on nitrification rates (Kallenbach et al., 2010; Schellenberg et al.,
2012; Kennedy et al., 2013; Abalos et al., 2014b; Vallejo et al., 2014)
Table 2
Constraints to management practice change.
Agronomic
Measures
Ove-rall
(1)
Constraints References
Technical Economic Social (2) Environmental (3)
Adjust N
fertilization
to crop
needs
Low Soil analysis needed
to adjust dosage.
Need to know
adjusted crop
requirements
Potential increase
in labor costs (e.g.
split application)
and soil analysis
Perception of decreased
productivity
N.A. Aizpurua et al. (2010); Sánchez et al. (2016);
SmartSOIL (2015)
Substitute
synthetic
fertilizers
by manures
and slurries
Medium Need to know
adjusted crop
requirements
Need of adequate
equipment (for
incorporation of
slurries)
Transport and
application costs
New equipment
Legal restrictions (EU
Nitrates Directive 91/676/
EEC) – (i.e., use,
management, treatment and
transportation)
Bad smells
Only applicable to areas with
mixed farming systems
Perception of decreased
productivity
Potential pollution
and health issues
Abalos et al. (2013); Berenguer et al. (2008);
Cantero-Martínez et al. (2007); Cole et al.
(2000); Díaz-Cruz (2003); Feilberg et al.
(2011); Küçükdogan et al. (2015); Sánchez
et al. (2014)
Fertigation &
improved
irrigation
technology
High New infrastructure
associated with
conversion
Maintenance
difficulties
(fertigation)
Initial expensive
investment costs
Not for all crops Potential
accumulation of
heavy metals in
crops (i.e., rice)
Ayars et al. (2015); Kennedy et al. (2013);
Pereira et al. (2002); Thompson et al. (2000)
Nitrification &
Urease
inhib.
High N.A. Increase of
fertilization costs
Not widely spread among
neighboring farmers
N.A. Abalos et al. (2014a); Linzmeier et al. (2001);
Timilsena et al. (2015)
Biochar Low Lack of experiments
at local conditions
Expensive product
(2$ per kilo)
Lack of knowledge on how to
produce it on-site; Lack of
regulations
N.A. Hussain et al. (2016)
Composted
sewage
sludge
High Access/availability
to/of materials
Transport and
management
Specific knowledge required
to adjust rates to crop
requirements and pollution
targets
Legal restrictions (i.e.,
Council Directive 86/278/
EEC (CEC, 1986); Landfill
Directive 99/31/EC (CEC,
1999))
Bad smells and negative
image in some areas.
Pollution issues,
sanitary problems
(antibiotics) and
increase in soil
salinity
Klee et al. (2004); Threedeach et al. (2012)
Crop residues
& agroindustry
byproducts
Medium Access/availability
to/of materials
Initial investment
cost (machinery)
Loss of revenue
from straw sales
Specific knowledge required
(compost)
Regulation of rates
Strong traditions avoiding
the use of by-products
(other uses)
Risk of
fire (from
residues)
Sanitary problems
(by-products)
Aguilera et al. (2015a); Giacomo and Taglieri,
2009; Spinelli and Picchi, (2010); Luna et al.
(2012); Sánchez et al. (2016)
Low/no tillage Low Possible weeds and
compaction
problems
Initial investment,
income loss at
short-term, cost
on machinery
Need of herbicide
Training and advisory
support
Strong traditions of
conventional farmers
Reluctance from sales
technicians
Potential pollution
(herbicides)
Annett et al. (2014); Ingram et al. (2014);
Sánchez et al. (2014, 2016); Sánchez-Girón
et al. (2004); SmartSOIL (2015)
Cover crops Low Higher requirements
on planning
Limited under water
scarcity (i.e., water or
nutrients
competition)
Extra sowing and
killing costs
associated to the
cover crop
Lack of training (e.g, species
selection, residue
management, kill date)
Strong traditions of
conventional farmers
N.A. Alonso-Ayuso et al. (2014); Gabriel et al.
(2012); Ingram et al. (2014); Sanz-Cobena
et al. (2014a); Sánchez et al. (2014, 2016);
SmartSOIL (2015)
Crop
Rotations
Low Higher requirements
on planning and
advice
Loss of market
opportunities
Lack of training on selecting
crop species and sequences
or weed control
N.A. Ingram et al. (2014); Sánchez et al. (2014,
2016); SmartSOIL (2015)
(1) Overall constraints assessment. This has been determined by assessing all specific constraints in an expert judgement analysis; (2) Legal and behavioural; (3) Pollution and
sanitary; N.A.: low or non-existing constraints.
10 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
(Table 1). Since this is a relatively new methodology, there could be
initial economic barriers associated with conversion from furrow or
sprinkler (Table 2). Technical and economic barriers associated with
maintenance may also exist; a problem that automation may
partially overcome, easing irrigation and fertilization activities
(Thompson et al., 2000). Conversely, fertigation may serve to reduce
costs due to input savings (e.g., water, fertilizers) and increases in
cropqualityand productivity(Kennedyetal.,2013;Ayarsetal.,2015).
2.2. Agronomic practices affecting CH4 emissions
Mediterranean agricultural soils produce large CH4 emissions in
flooded crops (e.g. rice) through methanogenesis, representing 6%
of all CH4 production from agricultural sources. Water table
management has been proven to significantly reduce CH4 losses in
non-Mediterranean climates (Yagi et al., 1997; Kudo et al., 2014;
Liang et al., 2016). By decreasing the
flooding period, both
methanogenesis and CH4 evasion through the water table, one
of the CH4 transport pathways, are limited. This leads to lower
emissions and reduces water consumption, a crucial goal to
improve the sustainability of Mediterranean agro-ecosystems
(Rizzo et al., 2013, 2015) (Table 1).
Methane emissions also depend on the incorporation of organic
matter (mainly crop residues). Increases in CH4 emissions from rice
production were reported when straw was added from 0 up to
7 t N ha1 in a Mediterranean cropping system (CH4 emission
ranging from c. 100 to c. 500 kg CH4 ha1 yr1; Sanchis et al., 2012)
(Table 1).
With regard to rice straw management strategies, recom-
mended practices for enhancing GHG mitigation are composting
rice straw, straw burning under controlled conditions, recollecting
rice straw for biochar production, generation of energy, using it as a
substrate, or source of other by-products with added value.
In non-flooded Mediterranean systems, the effect of fertilizer
application rate on soil CH4 uptake has been found to be positive
(Meijide et al., 2017), negative (Guardia et al., 2016) or neutral
(Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2014b). Variable effects, depending on organic
or synthetic fertilizers on CH4 sink capacity, were reported by
Sánchez-Martín et al. (2010b). The lower CH4 uptake following the
application of high C-content amendments has been related to
changes in soil porosity and enhancement of soil respiration rates,
promoting anaerobic microsites and consequently reducing
methanotrophy (Le Mer and Roger, 2001).
2.3. Agronomic practices affecting C sequestration
Levels of OM in Mediterranean soils are generally low and are
expected to decrease further in many Mediterranean areas in the
coming years (Davidson and Janssens, 2006) as a result of
generalized low C inputs and increased soil organic carbon
(SOC) decomposition rates associated with rising temperatures
(e.g., Al-Adamat et al., 2007) thus increasing the GWP of
Mediterranean agro-ecosystems.
Management practices aimed at increasing SOC stocks must
target a positive balance between C inputs and outputs through the
reduction of SOC losses (Powlson et al., 2011; Plaza-Bonilla et al.,
2016), the increase of organic C inputs into the soil, or both
(Aguilera et al., 2013a; Six et al., 2004). Most practices leading to
increasing SOC content include reduced soil tillage, careful
management of crop residues and agroindustry products in
herbaceous crops, and cover cropping in orchards. These practices
have relevant co-benefits through improved soil physical, chemical
and biological quality (Lal, 2011; Lassaletta and Aguilera, 2015),
enhanced crop productivity, reduced dependence on external
inputs (Smith and Olesen, 2010) and lower soil erosion rates.
2.3.1. Reduced soil tillage
Reduction or complete cessation of tillage decreases the direct
incorporation of fresh organic debris into deeper soil layers. The
absence of tillage (NT) slows down aggregate turnover and, in turn,
increases the physical stabilization of SOC within soil aggregates
(Álvaro-Fuentes et al., 2008; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2010). An
approximate annual increase of 1% in SOC when tillage is avoided
in Mediterranean croplands has been observed (own estimation
from Aguilera et al., 2013a). This is above the 0.4% targets of recent
initiatives for sustainable soil conservation (http://4p1000.org).
The response under reduced tillage (RT) was variable and of similar
magnitude, with average accrual rates of 0.32–0.47 Mg C ha1 yr1
compared to conventional tillage management (CT) (Sánchez et al.,
2016). In semiarid conditions (400 mm of total rainfall), Guardia
et al. (2016) indicated that NT
fixed 0.5 Mg C ha1 yr1, whereas
0.06 Mg C ha1 yr1 was accumulated in the soil under RT
practices. Estimates are highly dependent on the soil depth used
for the calculation, since vertical SOC distribution in NT and CT
systems is different (Cantero-Martínez et al., 2007). Further, the
assumption of a steady and linear C sequestration may not hold
true, because the annual C accumulation rate tends to decrease in
the long-term (Álvaro-Fuentes et al., 2014).
No-tillage practices are more commonly used in rain-fed
systems; but they are also suitable for irrigated (although RT is
more recommended in these systems), extensive, intensive and
organic systems with well-drained soils. In water-limited regions,
such as dryland Mediterranean areas, NT enhances soil water
retention potential, and has a positive effect on biomass
production and crop residue inputs (Lampurlanés et al., 2016).
The greater soil water retention potential under NT is the result of
reduced evaporation due to the mulch protection, and enhanced
soil water infiltration due to the higher structural stability at the
soil surface.
The reduction or cessation of tillage requires specific management
according to the climatic zone (SmartSOIL, 2015). Reduced
tillage is an accepted practice by an increasing proportion of
farmers, although initial investment cost for specific seeding
machinery can constrain farmers’ willingness to adopt RT or NT
(Table 2). It usually leads to net cost reductions, despite the initial
investment (Sánchez-Girón et al., 2004) since farmers save labor
time and fuel inputs compared to conventional tillage (Álvaro-
Fuentes et al., 2014; Sánchez et al., 2014, 2016; SmartSOIL, 2015;
Guardia et al., 2016). Even so, NT practices need to be accompanied
by the application of herbicides, which may increase costs and
produce pollution in soil and water bodies if improperly managed
(Annett et al., 2014). Efforts are being made to promote NT
practices with decreased use of phytochemicals (e.g. Sans et al.,
2011; Armengot et al., 2015).
2.3.2. Crop rotations and cover crops
Long crop rotations have been proposed in rain-fed Mediterra-
nean cropping systems to enhance C sequestration and restore soil
fertility and structure (Benlhabib et al., 2014). The effect of crop
rotations on C sequestration is highly dependent on time with no
significant effect reported in short-term studies (López-Bellido
et al., 1997; Hernanz et al., 2002; Martin-Rueda et al., 2007).
However, positive effects in long-term experiments (>15 years)
could appear if crop biomass is properly managed after harvest
(Masri and Ryan, 2006; López-Bellido et al., 2010; Martiniello and
Teixeira da Silva, 2011). For instance, a wheat-chickpea crop
rotation under CT, showed a C sequestration rate of 0.53 Mg C
ha1 y1 during a 20-year period, compared with wheat monoculture
(López-Bellido et al., 2010). The effect of crop rotations on SOC
stocks is also dependent on the type of crops included in the
rotation (Triberti et al., 2016) and the management of crop residue.
The introduction of perennial crops to rotations has shown benefits
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 11
for SOC stock and soil quality (Di Bene et al., 2011; Pellegrino et al.,
2011). The substitution of bare fallows by any crop (usually used to
improve water and nutrient availability for the following crop) has
been associated with SOC stabilization in NT systems (Álvaro-
Fuentes et al., 2009), and to reduced soil erosion (Boellstorff and
Benito, 2005). The effect on C sequestration of the inclusion of
grain legumes in rain-fed yearly rotations is dubious, due to their
low biomass production, although their conversion to stabilized
soil organic matter could be more efficient than that of cereals
(Carranca et al., 2009). Consequently, the highest potential of
fallow and legumes for mitigating GHG from these types of
cropping systems comes from the avoidance of fertilizer production
emissions.
Implementing crop rotations requires more detailed planning
compared to monocultures (e.g., selecting crop species/sequences
and nutrient and weed control practices), which can constitute a
management constraint. On the other hand, reduction of fertilizer,
pesticide and herbicide needs, and possible crop yield and soil
quality improvements in the long term, added to the low
investment and operational costs to implement the practice,
may encourage farmers to establish this traditional crop management
practice (Ferrio et al., 2007). Moreover, some legume species
and cultivars (e.g., green beans, peas, etc.) can represent high-value
crops, particularly in vegetable crop rotations. In forage cropping
systems, leguminous species can improve the forage quality and
therefore the economic profit (Rochon et al., 2004; Kala9c, 2012).
Crop rotations (particularly those which involve legumes) are
included in the greening requirements of the European Union
Common Agricultural Policy (EU CAP) incentives (crop diversification),
thus encouraging implementation among farmers (Ingram
et al., 2014).
Cover cropping (CC) in herbaceous cropping systems involves
the use of catch crops or green manures during the intercrop
period of irrigated cropping systems (intra-annual rotation) or
substituting bare fallows in rain-fed cropping systems (inter-
annual rotation). In fruit orchards, CC involves the use of
understory vegetation between tree rows or in the whole soil
surface. Catch crops are intended to reduce nutrient losses in soils
that are prone to greater N leaching losses (e.g. sandy or highly
fertilized soils). In terms of C sequestration, the use of CC has been
proposed as a mean to enhance SOM and labile C pools by
incorporating plant material into the soil (Veenstra et al., 2007).
Average C sequestration potential of winter CCs (cultivated in the
intercrop period of summer crops) has been reported at 0.32

0.08
Mg C ha1 y1 at the global level (Poeplau and Don, 2015). For
Mediterranean areas, González-Sánchez et al. (2012) studied cover
crops in woody cropping systems of Spain, reporting average C
sequestration rates of 1.54 and 0.35 Mg C ha1 y1 in studies of less
and more than 10 years, respectively, while Aguilera et al. (2013a)
calculated an average carbon sequestration rate of 0.27 Mg C ha1
y1 for all types of cover crops in a meta-analysis of Mediterranean
cropping systems.
Application of CCs is limited during seasons with water scarcity.
General lack of knowledge of the best CC management practices for
optimizing both environmental and economic profits limits the
correct implementation of CC. Selection of plant species, the
management of residues and the kill date are crucial factors
(Gabriel et al., 2012; Alonso-Ayuso et al., 2014; Sanz-Cobena et al.,
2014a) likely influencing the yields and N uptake efficiency of the
succeeding cash crop (Miguez and Bollero, 2005; Tonitto et al.,
2006). Reduction of fertilizers required for the subsequent crop,
(especially when grain legumes are used as green manure), and
gain of secondary products (e.g., animal feed) can deliver positive
economic benefits (Gabriel et al., 2012); usually outcompeting
sowing and killing costs (Table 2). Furthermore, CCs prevent soil
erosion, runoff and sediment losses (Blanco-Canqui et al., 2015),
improve soil structure, N supply and water retention capacity
(Quemada and Cabrera, 2002; Suddick et al., 2010), reduce leaching
(Bugg et al., 2007), improve soil microbial quality (Balota et al.,
2014) and reduce soil salinity during the early stages of the cash
crop (Gabriel et al., 2012).
2.3.3. Management of crop residues and agroindustry by-products
Estimating the GHG mitigation potential of using crop residues
and organic by-products from agroindustry in Mediterranean areas
implies accounting the net GHG balance when they are used as: (i)
soil amendments to improve SOM and enhance SOC sequestration
(Aguilera et al., 2013a), (ii) feedstock for bioenergy production (e.g.
Di Giacomo and Taglieri, 2009; Spinelli and Picchi, 2010), (iii) cosubstrate
for composting (e.g. Santos et al., 2016), (iv) feed for
livestock (e.g. Molina-Alcaide and Yáñez-Ruiz, 2008) or (v)
construction materials (e.g. animal beds, buildings). Also, we
must have a realistic estimate of the current fate of these organic
matter streams and the sustainability or economic issues (Pardo
et al., 2013) that may jeopardize the realization of such potential.
To our knowledge no such study has been made for the whole
Mediterranean area. Pardo et al. (2017), estimated for the
Mediterranean coastal areas in Spain reductions of 4.3 Tg CO2eq
yr1 (about 11% of total agricultural emissions in Spain in 2014) if
available local by-products from agri-food industries was codigested
with existing manure and applied to the nearby available
agricultural soils. This study suggests that, despite the overall large
stocking of crop-residues and by-products in the Mediterranean
basin (FAOStat, 2016), the potential for their use in cropping
systems may be reduced by its availability nearby.
The potential to increase SOC levels by using agroindustry by-
products, as in crop residues, depends on their composition and
degradability. However, agroindustry by-products vary widely in
their chemical composition and therefore in their degradation
rates. For example, olive and mill waste as they have very low
degradation rate in the soil have been found to be good
amendments to increase SOC when applied to the soil (Saviozzi
et al., 2001).
Besides the potential direct GHG reduction that any strategy
involving the return of the crop residues and agroindustry by-
products to the soil may cause, (e.g., Kassam et al., 2012,; Aguilera
et al., 2013a; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2015) applying these materials,
treated or un-treated, as soil amendments can also deliver
environmental co-benefits, such as erosion reduction when they
as raw are used for mulching (Blavet et al., 2009; Jordán et al., 2010)
or, in general, allowing closing the nutrient cycles, with associated
potential reductions of fertilizer use and reductions in the draught
force and fuel consumption for soil tillage (Peltre et al., 2015).
Trade-offs, however, may occur with some of the strategies that
may results in larger GHG mitigation potential. For example, the
use of crop residues on the soil surface might pose a risk of
fire in
some Mediterranean areas (Luna et al., 2012) and, sanitary,
pollution and legal constraints may apply, especially if the by-
product is applied to crops e.g. fresh vegetables without pre-
treatment (Table 2).
Composting and anaerobic digestion of agroindustry by-
products are common treatments that can improve the properties
of the organic matter and can also provide additional overall GHG
reductions (del Prado et al., 2013). The composting process has
relatively low associated GHG emissions (Pardo et al., 2015) and
can lead to moderate to high SOC sequestration rates when used as
soil amendments (Aguilera et al., 2013a). Long term humic-clay
associations promote a more efficient protection of SOM and longlasting
C sequestration in amended soils. The composted material
will lower the soil pH, reducing the decarbonation process in soils
developed over calcareous materials (common in the Mediterra-
nean basin). Anaerobic digestion of agro-industry by-products
12 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
reduces overall GHG emissions through the generation of biogas.
The conversion of OM into biogas (i.e., CO2 and CH4) involves a
fraction of C that is released to the atmosphere, instead of being
applied to the land. Therefore, although digestate application
increases soil C storage and produces benefits over soil quality in
the long term, the potential for C sequestration (per unit of initial
residue amount) could be lower when compared with undigested
materials. On the other hand, the high nutrient availability of
anaerobically digested organic wastes makes digestate an economically
viable substitute of mineral fertilizer (Arthurson, 2009).
Sewage sludge is currently applied to agroecosystems, especially
to degraded soils of Mediterranean areas (Albiach et al.,
2001; Fernández et al., 2009) due to its high OM. However, the
labile OM forms present in sewage sludge and the high amounts
usually applied (Franco-Otero et al., 2012) may increase CO2
emissions due to increased soil respiration (Flavel et al., 2005; Song
and Lee, 2010). Sludge use is highly constrained by fresh water
pollution and availability issues. It is likely that increasing social
and political environmental concerns, reflected in national and
international normative, will further extend the use of wastewater
treatment systems thus increasing sludge production. In this
context, the EU Landfill Directive 99/31/EC (CEC, 1999) banning the
landfilling of sewage sludge (Klee et al., 2004) should lead to a
better reuse of sewage sludge, thus reconnecting urban and rural
environments and ensuring the absence of risks for both the
society and the environment. In this sense, further studies are
needed to assess the impact of sewage sludge on (e.g.) antibiotic
resistance in soil microbiota (Chen et al., 2016).
Biochar (a solid by-product generated by pyrolysis) application
to soils has been suggested as a means of reducing atmospheric
CO2 concentration. Biochar's climate change-mitigation potential
relies on its highly recalcitrant nature, which decreases the rate at
which vegetation C is released to the atmosphere (Woolf et al.,
2010). Biochar's mitigation potential depends on production
process, and further experimental assessments of its efficiency
under Mediterranean conditions are required (Hussain et al.,
2016).
3. Side-effects associated to selected GHG mitigation practices
3.1. GHG emissions
Specific management practices primarily target the mitigation
of a single GHG (e.g. decreased soil tillage aimed at increased soil
CO2 sequestration) may promote the release (trade-off) or
mitigation (win-win) of other GHGs (e.g. N2O or CH4).
Enhanced direct N2O emissions have been observed after NT in
the short-term (Six et al., 2004), especially in poorly drained soils
(Rochette, 2008). On the long term, increased soil porosity in NT
systems, counterbalances the greater WFPS levels typically found
in NT compared to tilled soils (Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2013a,b; Kessel
et al., 2013). Conversely, NT can reduce indirect N2O emissions due
to lower runoff and N leaching (Holland, 2004; Soane et al., 2012).
In the case of crop rotations with bare fallow (BF), Sánchez-
Martín et al. (2010b) showed negative N2O
fluxes in a fallow period
between two irrigated onion crops under Mediterranean conditions.
Under similar climatic conditions but in a rain-fed crop,
Tellez-Rio et al. (2015) observed lower N2O emissions from a wheat
crop preceded by a fallow period than from a monocrop of the
same cereal.
For crop rotations including CCs, the effect on N2O emissions
needs to be assessed by differentiating the intercrop and the cash
crop periods. During the intercrop, contrasting results have been
obtained. The meta-analysis of Basche et al. (2014) pointed out an
overall enhancement of N2O losses, particularly in the case of
legume-CCs. These results were supported by Guardia et al. (2016)
in a
field experiment in Mediterranean conditions. Conversely,
during the subsequent cash crop period, CCs as opposed to BF have
potential to decrease N2O emissions due to the lower requirement
of N fertilizers. The same authors showed that synthetic N applied
to a maize crop preceded by vetch (a legume) could be decreased
by 25% without yield penalties. However, also under Mediterra-
nean conditions, neither Sanz-Cobena et al. (2014a) nor Guardia
et al. (2016) observed a significant effect of catch crop management
on N2O emissions when considering the whole crop and intercrop
cycles. Since the effect of CCs on direct N2O losses is negligible
(particularly when considering the whole cropping cycle and
integrated fertilization management) CCs mainly reduce indirect
N2O emissions associated with N leaching (Gabriel et al., 2012;
Quemada et al., 2013). In any case, both BF and the use of legumes
in yearly rotations decrease the GHG emissions from N fertilizer
manufacturing, making crop operations (e.g., machinery, agrochemicals
manufacturing, etc.) the main source of GHG emissions
in these systems (Aguilera et al., 2015a; Guardia et al., 2016).
Biochar has attracted attention as a strategy for mitigating N2O
emissions from agricultural soils, along with the initial concept of
increasing SOC stocks. Biochar was found to decrease N2O
emissions by close to 50% (Cayuela et al., 2015), with soils from
Mediterranean origin showing variable but large mitigation
potential, up to 90% according to lab studies of wood biochar
(Cayuela et al., 2013). However,
field studies under Mediterranean
conditions have shown small to no significant reductions (Castaldi
et al., 2011; Suddick and Six, 2013; Pereira et al., 2015), or even a
slight increase in N2O emissions (Sánchez-García et al., 2016).
These different outputs between lab and
field studies were
probably due to the fact that laboratory conditions were not
finally reflected on the
field (Cayuela et al., 2014), and suggests that
further experiments using a range of soil types, crops (absence of
perennial and horticultural crops) and management practices is
required. The effectiveness of biochar to significantly decrease N2O
emissions depends on the soil type (Sánchez-García et al., 2014),
the N fertilizer used (Nelissen et al., 2014) and, ultimately, on the
main pathways leading to N2O formation (nitrification vs.
denitrification). Biochar from woody materials (low C/N ratios)
produced by slow pyrolysis at high temperatures (>500 C; molar
H:Corg < 0.3) have shown the highest mitigation potential
(Cayuela et al., 2014, 2015).
3.2. Non-GHG emissions
Ammonia volatilization, nitric oxide (NO) and NO3
 leaching
are the main pathways of non-GHG pollutant release to the
environment from Mediterranean agricultural soils. Whereas NO
contributes to the formation of ozone, and influences air quality,
both NH3 and NO3
 losses also indirectly affect emissions of N2O
(IPCC, 2006).
In rain-fed systems, NO3
 leaching normally occurs in autumn
and is mostly driven by episodic precipitation events and external
N inputs. In irrigated systems, N losses through leaching occur in
summer due to high irrigation and N fertilization rates. Ammonia
emissions are common in both rain-fed and irrigated cropping soils
if urea and ammonium-based fertilized are applied to the soil
surface.
Adjusting N fertilization rates to crop needs may have positive
side-effects on the abatement of both NH3 volatilization and NO3

leaching (Quemada et al., 2013; Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b). The use
of solid manure can lower N losses through reduced leaching
(Sánchez-Martín et al., 2010a) and N2O emissions (Meijide et al.,
2007, 2009), due to enhanced microbial and plant immobilization
of N (Table 1). The application of liquid manure (slurries) can
improve soil structure, decreasing the risk of N leaching in the
medium term (Zavattaro et al., 2012; Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2013a,b),
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 13
although it can increase it in the short term when applied at high
rates (Yagüe and Quílez, 2015).
Manure application in the
field can trigger NH3 volatilization
(e.g. Sanz et al., 2010; Viguria et al., 2015) if no NH3-abatement
strategies are applied (Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b). Slurry injection
technologies have been shown to reduce NH3 emission by 40–90%
compared with broadcast application (Webb et al., 2010).
However, this may leave more mineral N available to be lost in
the form of e.g., NO3
 and N2O if soil conditions favor
denitrification (high WFPS) (Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014b). On
well-drained arable soils, injection can reduce N losses, as it
reduces NH3 volatilization while it has little effect on N2O
emission rates. In Mediterranean agriculture, slurry injection is
still a marginal practice, but may have a great potential for NH3
abatement without compromising N2O mitigation due to dry soil
conditions that are unfavorable for denitrification. Immediate
incorporation of manure (pig, cattle and poultry manure) into the
soil by ploughing may reduce up to 90% of NH3 compared with no
ploughing (Webb et al., 2010). Ammonia abatement will decrease
to 50% if soil incorporation is delayed for some hours (Dell et al.,
2012), or incorporation systems other than ploughing are used
(e.g., discs, tines; Thompson et al., 2000). Fertilizer injections and
tilling within the
first 24 h after application are not popular
among farmers because of the additional costs and technical
difficulties associated.
In the case of digested agroindustry by-products, the increase in
NH4
+ associated with the transformation process improves
fertilizer potential, but may also enhance N emissions through
NH3 volatilization. The
final effect on direct and indirect NO
emissions will be determined by the complex interactions involved
in the soil-plant system, which are influenced by the composition
of the organic amendment, but are tightly controlled by the soil
conditions (e.g. water content, temperature) and the time and
method of application (Thorman et al., 2007). Similarly, for sewage
sludge applied to croplands as soil amendments, large amounts of
N in NH4
+ form may be released, providing a substrate for
nitrification (Kleber et al., 2000) and thus increasing NO emissions
(Roelle and Aneja, 2002). Techniques to stabilize sludge improve
the soil retention of organic C (Dere and Stehouwer, 2011) and
reduce the risk of N leaching due to the low proportion of available
N (15–20%). In contrast, thermal-drying of sludge causes an
increase in easily-mineralizable organic N (Tarrasón et al., 2008),
with readily plant-available NH4
+ of up to 85% (Gendebien et al.,
2008). This may lead to, not only to higher GHG emissions due to
enhanced activity of nitrifiers and denitrifiers, increasing risk of
NH3 volatilization.
The inclusion of a NI with any NH4
+-based N fertilizer will retain
N in the soil in the form of NH4
+, thus reducing potential losses by
NO3
 leaching (Quemada et al., 2013). By inhibiting nitrification,
NIs can also mitigate NO emissions (Qiao et al., 2015; Guardia et al.,
2016). The expected increase on NH4
+ in the upper soil associated
with the use of NIs may increase the risk of NH3 volatilization if
environmental and weather conditions are favorable for this
process and the fertilizer is applied to the soil surface. On the other
hand, the production and transport of inhibitors may increase
emissions of CO2. Reductions in NH3 volatilization induced by UIs
may increase soil mineral N prone to be lost as NO3
 leaching,
which would eventually increase indirect N2O emissions. However,
the few
field investigations carried out under Mediterranean
conditions have not shown any significant UI effect on N leaching
(e.g., Sanz-Cobena et al., 2012).
Improved irrigation techniques have been shown to reduce
NO3
 leaching (Quemada et al., 2013) as a result of lower soil
moisture and a lower proportion of wet soil surface, but may
potentially increase NO emissions (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2010a).
In the case of fertigated soils, indirect N2O emissions from leached
NO3
 would be reduced due to lower irrigation rates and higher
irrigation frequency (avoiding deep percolation), as well as better
synchronization between N supply and plant N needs (Quemada
et al., 2013).
3.3. Crop yields
Adjusting N fertilization rates to crop needs, if properly done,
does not have negative effects on crop yields (Yagüe and Quílez,
2010), but only on reduced N losses. Similarly, the use of organic
amendments instead of synthetic fertilizers does not have a
negative effect on crop yields per se. As occurring with synthetic
fertilizers, applying solid manures only as N fertilizer could
decrease yields if N application rates (and/or timing) are not
precisely adjusted to crop requirements (Abalos et al., 2013)
(Table 1). This may result in an effective mitigation per surface area
but the yield-scaled N2O emissions could increase.
Solid manures are usually applied in combination with
synthetic fertilizers or liquid manures to achieve adequate N
application rates. For slurries, increases in cereal yields have been
reported, presumably due to a more balanced nutrition (Plaza-
Bonilla et al., 2014a). However, in more productive areas (e.g.
irrigated or sub-humid) and high-yielding crops (e.g. maize)
farmers tend to complement slurry application with synthetic
fertilizer as a top-dressing application (Bosch-Serra et al., 2015).
The use of urease or nitrification inhibitors in combination with
synthetic fertilizers has shown slightly positive or negligible
effects on crop yields (Abalos et al., 2013). No significant effect of 3,
4-dimethyl pyrazole phosphate (DMPP) on crop yields has been
measured, while increases in yields (5–10%) have been measured
when using DCD (Vallejo et al., 2005; Abalos et al., 2014a; Huérfano
et al., 2015).
Diversified crop rotations have shown to improve yields (López-
Fando and Almendros, 1995; López-Bellido et al., 2000) (Table 1).
On the contrary, the presence of BF in rotations is usually
associated with decreased SOC contents (Álvaro-Fuentes et al.,
2008; Ryan et al., 2009) enhancing the cropping system GWP, but
also affecting soil fertility and the yield-scaled GHG budget. The
benefits on crop yield and direct N2O emissions (considering the
whole intercrop-cash crop cycle) are enhanced when using legume
CCs (Tonitto et al., 2006; Quemada et al., 2013; Doltra and Olesen,
2013) but there may be drawbacks for direct mitigation of N2O
emissions during the intercrop period (Basche et al., 2014; Guardia
et al., 2016), as well as for preventing N leaching. Further research
should analyze these trade-offs in the short- and long-term,
considering both direct and indirect N2O and other GHG emissions.
In the case of soil management practices, although highly
dependent on pedoclimatic conditions, increases up to 20% in
yields have been reported in Mediterranean environments under
reduced tillage (Cantero-Martínez et al., 2007; Pittelkow et al.,
2014) with some exceptions (Pittelkow et al., 2014).
4. Effect of agricultural practices on the total GHG budget of
rain-fed and irrigated cropping systems
The main management practices affecting C sequestration, N2O
and CH4 emissions have been discussed, so the most promising
measures can be selected, considering the overall GHG balance in
each specific Mediterranean agro-ecosystem (Table 3). The
dominant GHG sources of each cropping system and each
particular area (local pedoclimatic conditions) should be considered
for prioritizing the adoption of efficient techniques, but also
taking into account all practices that could provide an optimum
balance between GHG mitigation and crop yields while saving/
maintaining farm expenses or leading to an efficient use of
available resources.
14 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
The study of Aguilera et al. (2015a) pointed out that the main
GHG sources in herbaceous cropping systems in Mediterranean
areas were emissions from machinery due to the low direct GHG
emissions in these systems. Guardia et al. (2016), in a non-irrigated
cereal-legume rotation, also confirmed that the relative weight of
N2O losses was lower than that of farm inputs and operations,
while C sequestration was the main GHG component under NT
adoption. Despite some uncertainties and variability that could be
attributed to the C sink (e.g., the depth considered for calculation,
the decrease of annual sequestration rate in the long term) (Álvaro-
Fuentes et al., 2014), it appears that practices such as NT/RT
combined with crop rotations including legumes and cover crops,
without removal of crop residues, are the most promising for
minimizing fuel consumption and external inputs (e.g. conserva-
tion agriculture practices, as conventional ones, might rely on the
use of pesticides), and promote C sequestration (Table 3). These
practices may provide the best GHG balance in rain-fed
Mediterranean herbaceous crops, without negative side-effects
on crop yields or N losses. Adjusting N rates to crop needs may
improve the GHG balance of rain-fed herbaceous cropping systems
through two components (N2O emissions and CO2 equivalents
from production and transport of fertilizers) while reducing costs,
so this practice should be encouraged in Mediterranean areas.
In summer irrigated crops, high N2O losses can occur (Aguilera
et al., 2013b). Consequently, agricultural practices based on an
improved management of irrigation water (e.g., drip irrigation), N
fertilization (e.g., adjusting N rates and timing, use of nitrification
inhibitors) and both (e.g., fertigation) are the most promising
measures in these agro-ecosystems. Since fruit orchards are
broadly characterized by efficient water and fertilizer use (e.g.,
drip irrigation and drip-fertigation), other promising techniques
are cover cropping (thus minimizing fuel consumption) and
pruning-residue management for enhancing C stocks (Aguilera
et al., 2015b).
Methane emissions are the main component of the GHG budget
of paddy
fields (Aguilera et al., 2015a), so mitigation efforts should
focus on water management for minimizing these losses (see
Section 2.1). Reducing water consumption in vegetable cropping
systems may lead to substantial GHG emission reductions
(Aguilera et al., 2015a).
5. Socioeconomic performance of agronomic measures and
constraints to implementation
The degree of implementation of agronomic strategies pro-
posed in this review differs among countries under Mediterranean
climatic conditions. Even so, management strategies based on
farmers’ practices (e.g. crop rotations, cover cropping, etc.) are
widespread, but there is room for increasing their application.
Adoption of conservation agriculture (CA) practices (i.e.
coincidence in time and space of i) reduced tillage,
25%, or notillage;
ii) >30% of soil cover, with mulch materials or living crops
including CCs; and iii) crop rotations or associations) (FAO, 2011a,
2011b) in dry Mediterranean cropping systems has been reported
by Kassam et al. (2012). According to this study, CA practices are
implemented in 72 million ha (14% of the total cropland with this
climatic regime). Outside the Mediterranean basin, where
adoption of CA practices is still modest (c. average of 3% over
total arable land) (Lahmar, 2010; Kassam et al., 2012), there are
several countries and regions showing successful adoption of CA.
These include the USA (16% of total cropland under no-tillage)
(Kassam et al., 2012), central Chile (30% of rain-fed systems growth
under CA practices) (Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009), South Africa
and south Western Australia (CA adopted by 90% of farmers)
(Llewellyn et al., 2009). In Mediterranean Europe, Spain is the
country with the largest cropping surface under CA (650,000 ha, 5%
of cropland, and 1,218,726 ha of perennial trees – mostly olives and
grapes – in combination with CCs) (MERMA, 2010; González-
Sánchez et al., 2015). In North and South African areas under
Mediterranean conditions, the implementation of CA is, to date,
sparse (Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009; FAO, 2011a, 2011b). Even so,
cereal-based CA systems of Mediterranean regions of northern
Africa and Southern EU (i.e. organic farming systems) frequently
show coexistence of livestock (e.g. small ruminants) and cropping
systems (e.g. olives), which facilitates CA practices such as crop
rotations as well as the reusing of manures as fertilizers (Kassam
et al., 2012).
Mitigation through water management approaches also
presents a high potential. Spate irrigation dominates African
regions under Mediterranean conditions (FAO, 2011a, 2011b).
Irrigated crops are grown under full controlled irrigation, which
includes surface, sprinkler and drip irrigation in the EU, EEUU and
Oceania. Among the irrigation technologies used in Mediterranean
cropping systems, furrows are still widespread in summer-
irrigated crops, followed by increasing sprinkler irrigation systems
(MAGRAMA, 2014). Surface irrigation with furrows was applied in
62% and 71% of the total irrigated cropland (14,249 ha and 3,297 ha)
for maize and wheat, respectively, according to a survey based
report focusing on farmers practices of the Ebro watershed (Spain)
(Sisquella et al., 2004). Water-saving irrigation systems such as
drip irrigation (both surface and subsurface) are still being
developed.
Fertigation use is increasing, particularly in high-value crops
(e.g. horticulture, orchards) which are very representative in
Mediterranean areas. According to FAO (2014), around 9 million ha
of cropland are currently under fertigation.
Nitrogen over-fertilization has been noticed in agricultural
systems of high income economies, mostly in irrigated cropping
systems. On average, 57% of the N crop uptake is over applied in
Europe (Sánchez et al., 2016). This percentage is even higher in
certain Mediterranean EU countries, such as Italy and Spain, where
there are hotspots of intensive livestock production, leading to
large quantities of manures normally surface-applied to croplands
(Sanz-Cobena et al., 2014a). As an example, in maize crops of
Table 3
Main component and mitigation practices associated of each cropping system in Mediterranean areas (NA = not applicable).
Crop type Main component of radiative forcing Main mitigation practice Other pollutants
Rain-fed Irrigated Rain-fed Irrigated Rain-fed Irrigated
Herbaceous Machinery/
external inputs;
C seq. (NT)
N2O Reducing fuel consumption and
external inputs, reduced tillage,
crop rotations (including
legumes), adjusted N rates, Nis
Water management
(e.g. drip irrigation), N
fertilization (e.g.
adjusted N rates, Nis)
Increased
NH3
Increased
NH3,
NO3

Fruit
orchards
C sequestration N2O NA Cover crops, pruning
crop residues
NA NA
Rice NA CH4 NA Water management,
straw management
mitigation strategies
NA Increased
N2O
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 15
Catalonia and Aragón (NE Spain) farmers apply more than
400 kg N ha1 in 84% of the cropping area due to application of
both manures and synthetic fertilizers (Sisquella et al., 2004).
According to expert judgement, this can be extrapolated to
cropping areas of California (USA), Australia and Chile although.
In these regions, surface application of manure is common on
pasture and silage
fields and some rangelands.
The implementation of technological mitigation solutions
focusing on fertilization, such as urease and nitrification inhibitors,
is expected to be limited in Mediterranean cropping systems,
mostly due to associated extra costs for farmers. According to
producers, the use of inhibitors increases cost of synthetic N
fertilizer by 20% (Sutton et al., 2015). According to this, a larger
expansion would be expected in high income economies (e.g. EU,
EEUU and Australia), where there could exist subsidies for farmers
to adopt this kind of technology.
Based on this analysis, there is large potential for implementing
the strategies presented in this review. However, there are certain
constraints that may make their implementation more difficult in
the coming years.
5.1. Constraints to management practice change
Constraints to management practice change by farmers, and the
overall impact of these constraints on implementation of the
practice, assessed by expert judgement are summarized in Table 2.
The application of most of these agronomic measures can be
hindered by economic constraints. Several practices require
aninitial investment for the acquisition of specific equipment
(improved irrigation technology, fertigation, crop residues and
agro-industry by-product management, low/no tillage). Economic
constraints could also arise in the form of a regular cost due to
possible yield penalties (N fertilization adjustment, organic fertili-
zation, low/no tillage and cover crops). In the case of crop rotations
and the use of crop residues and agro-industry by-products, these
practices can reduce benefits from other economic activities.
Most agronomic measures described in this review are also
accompanied by some kind of technical constraint. This mainly
relates to N fertilizer adjustment, the substitution of synthetic
fertilizer by manures, the application of sewage sludge, no/low
tillage practices, cover crops and crop rotations. Some of these
practices require additional work, such as soil sampling, or
learning how to use or maintain new equipment (e.g. incorporation
of manures, improved irrigation technology, fertigation and
low/no tillage). Finally, low/no tillage practices can increase weeds
and soil compaction problems, thus increasing the need for
additional management practices, particularly the
first years after
adoption (Soane et al., 2012; Armengot et al., 2015).
Social constraints to management change are largely associated
with farmer perceptions (Sánchez-Girón et al., 2004; Ingram et al.,
2014; Sánchez et al., 2014, 2016). Conventional farmers can be
reluctant to implement some of the practices because of strong
traditions (e.g., crop residue management, no-tillage, cover crops)
or having a perception of decreased productivity due to practice
implementation (e.g., adjusting fertilization rates or shifting from
synthetic fertilizers to manure). Further, new recommended
practices (e.g., nitrification and urease inhibitors, biochar), which
are not yet widespread among neighboring farmers can be
negatively perceived (Hussain et al., 2016). A lack of training for
practices with high technical or maintenance requirements (e.g.,
irrigation technology, cover crops, crop rotations, adjusting
fertilization rates) may lead to management difficulties, or the
misuse and decline of yields, in turn encouraging the negative
perception of the practice's effectiveness (Cantero-Martínez et al.,
2007; Abalos et al., 2013). Legal restrictions for management,
treatment and transportation may also hinder the adoption of
practices related to the use of manure, agro-industry by-products
or sludge.
Environmental constraints to the adoption of management
practices are mainly related to pollution (e.g., heavy metal
accumulation through sludge use or by
flooding water management,
Klee et al., 2004 increased application of herbicides by notillage,
Annett et al., 2014) and health issues (e.g., for liquid
manures, Cole et al., 2000; or by-products without pre-treatment
applied to crops). Other environmental constraints can be
associated with risk of
fire due to leaving crop residues on the
soil surface (Luna et al., 2012).
Nonetheless, except for environmental constraints, most of the
barriers can be overcome by long term monetary savings or gains
associated with the practice. Most practices reduce the need of
exogenous N fertilizer, which is one of the main expenses for
farmers (Aizpurua et al., 2010; Abalos et al., 2014a; Aguilera et al.,
2015a,b). Improved irrigation technology, fertigation, or use of crop
residues and agro-industry by-products can reduce crop water
requirements, whereas crop rotations and improved irrigation
technology may also decrease the need for pesticides and/or
herbicides. Conservation tillage practices also reduce labor costs
and fuel consumption (Sánchez et al., 2016), while improved
irrigation technology and fertigation save time and labor costs
(Thompson et al., 2000). In other cases, the practice improves soil
quality and can increase crop yields and/or quality in the medium
or long term, as for the substitution of synthetic fertilizers by slurry
(Plaza-Bonilla et al., 2014a), the use of crop residues and agroindustry
by products, fertigation and improved irrigation technol-
ogy (Kennedy et al., 2013; Ayars et al., 2015), low/no tillage, cover
crops and crop rotations (Ferrio et al., 2007). Finally, in some cases,
an extra benefit is produced, as for crop residues and agro-industry
by-products (Arthurson, 2009).
Further, there are increasing numbers of innovative farmers and
associations who are implementing some management practices
with positive results and are demonstrating their effectiveness,
and advising to other interested or neighboring farmers. Some of
the practices are already included in the greening requirements of
the European Union Common Agricultural Policy (e.g., crop
diversification, crop rotations particularly those which involve
legumes), allowing economic incentives to encourage implementation
among farmers (Ingram et al., 2014).
5.2. Assessing policy options to regulate the implementation of
different mitigation strategies
The main outcomes of the literature review and the expert
judgement as discussed during a workshop held in Butrón
(Bizkaia) in December 2016, to synthesize the most promising
measures to abate N2O from cropping systems is presented in
Table 1 and 2. This information enabled to perform an assessment
based on the simple framework developed by Pannell (2008). This
framework was used for choosing environmental policy options to
regulate the implementation of different mitigation strategies
(Fig. 2). In the diagram, the public benefit in the “y” axis refers to
the percentage of mitigation (i.e., scale from
100 to 100%) of every
mitigation strategy based on the collected literature review values.
We calculated the private net benefit to the farmer on the “x”
axis according to the experts’ weights (i.e., scale from
5 to 5) on
the potential cost and benefit of every mitigation strategy (Table 1).
When applying the framework, the use of agricultural extension is
highly recommended to engage farmers to adopt strategies that do
not imply a cost to the farmer, but that can have large benefits to
society (e.g., adjusting N fertilization, manure fertilization,
fertigation, increasing legumes, advanced irrigation technology,
judicious crop residue management; see Fig. 2). The agricultural
extension option may include the increase of agricultural
16 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
demonstrations and communications, to transfer scientific and
technological
findings to the farming community. This would
enhance access to technical education on management practices
that deliver mitigation, and support the enlargement of farming
networks. Strategies such as injection of slurries, cover crops,
application of composted sewage sludge, biochar and use of
nitrification or urease inhibitors showed negative or negligible
economic net benefits for the farmers (private benefits). In this
case, two potential policy options might be applied, according to
Pannell (2008): i) positive incentives if societal net benefits are
high; and ii) technology development or no action when the public
net benefits are moderate or not high enough to warrant incentives
(Fig. 2).
6. Beyond the plot scale: assessing the combined effect of
reduced fertilization and drip irrigation on GHG emissions
Selected management actions show a strong potential for
mitigation of specific GHGs. However, it is important to assess this
potential within a context of the total GHG budget, including all the
involved processes in the production chain, beyond the plot scale,
in order to identify possible trade-offs.
Here we present the results of a simple exercise to illustrate
these trade-offs by comparing the total life cycle emissions
(including infrastructure production, electricity production, fertilizer
production, and direct and indirect N2O emissions) associated
with irrigation and N fertilization inputs in a series of hypothetical
scenarios. The scenarios cover three irrigation technologies (drip,
sprinkler and furrow) under two fertilization application rates (100
and 300 kg N ha1 yr1) and two levels of water pumping height
(surface and 200 m underground) under Mediterranean conditions
(Fig. 3). We estimated GHG emissions employing published
emission coefficients for each process involved, including specific
direct N2O emission factors for Mediterranean irrigation types
(Cayuela et al., 2017). Drip irrigation leads to lower overall N2O
emission levels only under certain conditions, particularly when a
high energy input has to be applied for water lifting and N is
applied at the high rate, as a result of lower water demand and
lower N2O emission factor (Fig. 3). However, in some situations, the
higher infrastructure burden and the energy needed for pressur-
izing lead to higher GHG emissions (CO2 eq ha1 yr1) from drip
irrigation than from furrow irrigation. Likewise, furrow irrigation
delivers the lowest emission level when water is easily available
and N is applied at the low rate, but the highest when water is
extracted from deep wells. On the other hand, our calculations
show that the outside-farm production of major inputs such as
electricity and N fertilizer is the main contributor to the balance in
most situations explored, suggesting that the main focus for
reducing the GHG balance of these systems should focus on
reducing the CO2 eq. foot-print associated to these inputs. This
could be achieved by reducing the amount of inputs, e.g.
optimizing N fertilizer rate and avoiding water with high
extraction costs. A complementary strategy would be to minimize
the CO2 eq. emissions from the production of these inputs by, for
example, substituting synthetic fertilizers by organic sources of N
(residues, biological N
fixation) and employing renewable energy
for electricity production. It is, therefore, important to consider all
the life cycle emissions under each specific circumstance in order
to select the best set of practices to maximize mitigation benefits
and reach cost-effectiveness in producing a unit of food.
7. Structural changes: behaviors and practices that can function
alongside agronomic GHG mitigation
Even if an optimized set of practices in terms of GHGs emissions
from soils is implemented, this could still result in an increased
overall sectorial emission due to energy intensive practices (such
long term transport) or increased waste along the production
Fig. 2. Policy options based on the Pannell (2008) framework for the GHG mitigation strategies in Mediterranean areas. This is based on choosing environmental policy
options to regulate the implementation of different mitigation strategies. The societal public benefit in the y-axis refers to the percentage of mitigation (i.e., scale from
100 to
100%) of every mitigation strategy based on literature review values. We calculated the private net benefit to the farmer in the x-axis according to the weights (i.e., scale from
5 to 5) on the potential cost and benefit of every mitigation strategy. These values were assigned by experts’ judgement.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 17
chain. Globally, 2.7 Tg of N are emitted to the environment in the
production of food waste (Grizzetti et al., 2013). A reduction of food
waste could significantly reduce the amount of reactive N emitted
to the environment during primary production, including N2O
(Bodirsky et al., 2014; Lamb et al., 2016). Between 3 and 15% of N2O
emissions could be suppressed by avoiding food waste at the
consumer level (Grizzetti et al., 2013; Vanham et al., 2015).
Additionally, curbing food waste would help to avoid GHG
emissions associated with waste management, particularly landfill
CH4 emissions, which, in a Mediterranean country such as Spain,
represented a similar level of emissions as enteric fermentation by
livestock in 2012 (MAGRAMA, 2014). This mitigation measure is
not specific to the Mediterranean region, other than considering
the relatively high food waste rates that are particularly relevant at
the consumption level of the Mediterranean countries belonging to
Europe or N America (Gustavsson et al., 2011). While the consumer
part is behavioural, the waste produced at other levels, namely
supermarket, distribution, agroindustry or farm, can be associated
with prices and competitiveness strategies (Parfitt et al., 2010).
Food waste reductions could be influenced by policy measures, but
diverse conflicts of interest could represent a barrier to implementation.
Changes in diet among population in developed and emerging
economies have led in recent years to unexpected increases in
GHGs emissions due to increased demand for meat and other
livestock products. A reduction of animal protein consumption by
50% in the EU would lead to a reduction of GHG emissions by 25 to
40%, depending on the alternative use of the land (Westhoek et al.,
2014). In several Mediterranean countries such as Spain, Italy and
Greece, the share of animal protein in the total protein intake has
increased from
35 to over 60%, evolving from a typical
Mediterranean diet to a diet rich in animal protein, over recent
decades (Lassaletta et al., 2014c). A reduction of 40% of meat and
dairy consumption would reduce GHG emissions by 20 to 30%.
Transport of food can also contribute significantly to the
footprint of agricultural products. With the exception of France, all
countries of the Mediterranean basin are net importers of
agricultural products, particularly in the form of feed. In 2009,
the countries of the Mediterranean basin net-imported 2.3 Tg N
embedded in traded commodities, most of them cultivated in
South America, North America, Northern European Countries and
Russia (Fig. 4). The production of feed in other countries generates
at the same time and spatial leakage of emissions that are not
considered by the national inventories (Lassaletta et al., 2014a). On
the other hand, reducing feed demand within Mediterranean
countries could reduce the need for land expansion at global scale.
The reintroduction of the Mediterranean diet (i.e., a back reduction
to
35% of animal protein, see Bach-Faig et al., 2011 for a detailed
description of the current Mediterranean diet) would reverse this
trend: animal production would be lower, land would become
available for other purposes and GHG emissions could be reduced
by more than 50% (Sáez-Almendros et al., 2013).
In summary, even if the most cost-effective practices are
implemented in feed and livestock production, their impacts on
GHGs mitigation may be offset by increased demand of high GHGintensity
products (such as meat), increases in food waste at the
consumer level and long distance transport. Both reduction of food
waste and animal protein consumption represent a reduction of
the food demand, and will not only reduce GHG emissions in the
agriculture sector, but will also lead to important co-benefits such
as decreased demand of agricultural land, giving space for
afforestation and reducing deforestation of natural forests, reduce
biodiversity loss and improving ecosystem services.
Fig. 3. Estimation of greenhouse gas emissions (kg CO2eq ha1 yr1) associated to irrigation and N fertilization in Mediterranean cropping systems for three different
irrigation types (drip, sprinkle and furrow) under two levels of N fertilization rate (100 and 300 kg N ha1 yr1) and two levels of pumping height (0 m and 100 m). Emission
values are based on data from: infrastructure: Lal (2004); electricity: direct electricity consumption from Aguilera et al. (2015c) and electricity emission factor from Aguilera
et al. (2015b); fertilizer production (average N fertilizers, Europe): Ecoinvent Centre (2007); N2O – indirect: IPCC (2006); N2O – direct: Cayuela et al. (2017).
18 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
Finally, disconnection between feed and livestock production
systems at the regional and global scales results in low nutrient use
efficiency of agro-ecosystems, because of difficulties in closing
nutrient cycles. Lack of manure in specialized cropping areas leads
to higher needs of synthetic fertilizers, and overuse of manure
often occur in areas with high animal concentrations (Bai et al.,
2014; Billen et al., 2013; Lassaletta et al., 2014a; Naylor et al., 2005;
van Grinsven et al., 2014). This phenomenon is driven by the
economic benefits associated with spatial concentration of
livestock systems, in combination with the low economic value
of manure per unit of mass. It has been observed for example in
Spain and Italy where areas of livestock production concentration
generates too much manure and slurries that are difficult to
manage (Lassaletta et al., 2012; Penuelas et al., 2009). In addition,
very high manure application rates, typical of livestock concentra-
tion areas, are associated with unusually high N2O EFs under
Mediterranean conditions (Heller et al., 2010). The potential of
reconnecting livestock and crop farming for mitigating GHG
emissions is illustrated by several examples at the local or regional
level (Granlund et al., 2015; Sasu-Boakye et al., 2014; Soussana and
Lemaire, 2014). Note however that, due to the high level of animal
protein production in some regions, both for local consumption
and export, a generalized transition to reconnection based on
higher local feed consumption would only be possible if it were
accompanied by a reduction of animal protein in the human diet
(van Grinsven et al., 2015, 2014; Westhoek et al., 2014). A higher
demand of non-oil crops feeds replacing soy, with lower protein
contents, could otherwise entail a higher land demand that could
offset the mitigation benefits or/and could compete with human
food. In several Mediterranean countries with livestock production
highly dependent on feed imports, a generalized reconnection
would require a transition towards the Mediterranean diet and also
a reduction of food waste. Thus, important positive synergies
between dietary changes, food waste reduction, production close
to consumers and livestock-crop reconnection could arise when
developed simultaneously.
8. Conclusions
The framework for GHG mitigation provided here, based on
solid and comprehensive scientific evidence, is of wide societal,
environmental and economic interest, affecting all stakeholders in
the Mediterranean agricultural sector, from farmers to govern-
ments.
Efficient implementation thus will require effective policies,
closer collaboration between scientists, stakeholders and farmers,
and enhanced public awareness and engagement.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Spanish National R+D+i
Plan (AGL2012-37815-C05-01, AGL2012-37815-C05-04) and very
specifically the workshop held in December 2016 in Butrón
(Bizkaia) to synthesize the most promising measures to reduce
N2O emissions from Spanish agricultural soils. BC3 is sponsored by
the Basque Government. M. L. Cayuela thanks Fundación Seneca
for
financing the project 19281/PI/14. This paper has been
produced within the context of the REMEDIA network: http://
redremedia.wordpress.com/.
References
Abalos, D., Sanz-Cobena, A., Misselbrook, T., Vallejo, A., 2012. Effectiveness of urease
inhibition on the abatement of ammonia, nitrous oxide and nitric oxide
emissions in a non-irrigated Mediterranean barley
field. Chemosphere 89, 310–
318.
Abalos, D., Sanz-Cobena, A., Garcia-Torres, L., van Groenigen, J.W., Vallejo, A., 2013.
Role of maize stover incorporation on nitrogen oxide emissions in a
nonirrigated Mediterranean barley
field. Plant Soil 364 (1–2), 357–371. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-012-1367-4.
Abalos, D., Jeffery, S., Sanz-Cobena, A., Guardia, G., Vallejo, A., 2014a. Meta-analysis
of the effect of urease and nitrification inhibitors on crop productivity and
nitrogen use efficiency. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 189, 136–144. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.03.036.
Abalos, D., Sánchez-Martín, L., Garcia-Torres, L., van Groenigen, J.W., Vallejo, A.,
2014b. Management of irrigation frequency and nitrogen fertilization to
Fig. 4. Net protein
fluxes (expressed in nitrogen) of food and feed imported to Mediterranean regions from the otherworld countries in 2009. Mediterranean regions marked
in black. Green countries are those which are net exporting N to the analyzed region. Yellow/red countries are those which are net importing N from the analyzed region.
Arrows show
fluxes between any region and the studied region. Fluxes below 50 Gg N are not represented. Calculated following Lassaletta et al. (2014b). (For interpretation of
the references to colour in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 19
mitigate GHG and NO emissions from drip-fertigated crops. Sci. Total Environ.
490, 880–888. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.05.065.
Abalos, D., Jeffery, S., Drury, C.F., Wagner-Riddle, C., 2016. Improving fertilizer
management in the US and Canada for N2O mitigation: understanding potential
positive and negative side-effects on corn yields. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 221,
214–221.
Aguilera, E., Lassaletta, L., Gattinger, A., Gimeno, B.S., 2013a. Managing soil carbon
for climate change mitigation and adaptation in Mediterranean cropping
systems: a meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 168, 25–36. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2013.02.003.
Aguilera, E., Lassaletta, L., Sanz-Cobena, A., Garnier, J., Vallejo, A., 2013b. The
potential of organic fertilizers and water management to reduce N2O emissions
in Mediterranean climate cropping systems. A review. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
164, 32–52. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2012.09.006.
Aguilera, E., Guzmán, G., Alonso, A., 2015a. Greenhouse gas emissions from
conventional and organic cropping systems in Spain. I. Herbaceous crops.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 713–724.
Aguilera, E., Guzmán, G., Alonso, A., 2015b. Greenhouse gas emissions from
conventional and organic cropping systems in Spain: II. Fruit tree orchards.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 725–737.
Aguilera, E., Guzmán, G.I., Infante-Amate, J., Soto, D., García-Ruiz, R., Herrera, A.,
Villa, I., Torremocha, E., Carranza, G., González de Molina, M., 2015c. Embodied
energy in agricultural inputs. Incorporating a historical perspective. DT-SEHA
1507 .
Aizpurua, A., Estavillo, J.M., Castellón, A., Alonso, A., Besga, G., Ortuzar-Iragorri, M.A.,
2010. Estimation of optimum nitrogen fertilizer rates in winter wheat in humid
mediterranean conditions, II: economically optimal dose of nitrogen. Commun.
Soil Sci. Plant Anal. 41, 301–307. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00103620903460815.
Akiyama, H., Yan, X., Yagi, K., 2010. Evaluation of effectiveness of enhancedefficiency
fertilizers as mitigation options for N2O and NO emissions from
agricultural soils: meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol.16,1837–1846. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.02031.x.
Al-Adamat, R., Rawajfih, Z., Easter, M., Paustian, K., Coleman, K., Milne, E., Falloon, P.,
Powlson, D.S., Batjes, N.H., 2007. Predicted soil organic carbon stocks and
changes in Jordan between 2000 and 2030 made using the GEFSOC Modelling
System. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 122, 35–45. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2007.01.006.
Albiach, R., Canet, R., Pomares, F., Ingelmo, F., 2001. Organic matter components,
aggregate stability and biological activity in a horticultural soil fertilized with
different rates of two sewage sludges during ten years. Bioresour. Technol. 77,
109–114. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0960-8524(00)00166-8.
Alonso-Ayuso, M., Gabriel, J.L., Quemada, M., 2014. The kill date as a management
tool for cover cropping success. PLoS One 9, e109587. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0109587.
Álvaro-Fuentes, J., López, M.V., Cantero-Martinez, C., Arrúe, J.L., 2008. Tillage effects
on soil organic carbon fractions in mediterranean dryland agroecosystems. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. J. 72, 541. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2007.0164.
Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cantero-Martínez, C., López, M.V., Paustian, K., Denef, K., Stewart,
C.E., Arrúe, J.L., 2009. Soil aggregation and soil organic carbon stabilization:
effects of management in semiarid Mediterranean agroecosystems. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. J. 73, 1519–1529.
Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Plaza-Bonilla, D., Arrúe, J.L., Lampurlanés, J., Cantero-Martínez, C.,
2014. Soil organic carbon storage in a no-tillage chronosequence under
Mediterranean conditions. Plant Soil 376, 31–41. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11104-012-1167-x.
Annett, R., Habibi, H.R., Hontela, A., 2014. Impact of glyphosate and glyphosate-
based herbicides on the freshwater environment. J. Appl. Toxicol. 34, 458–479.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jat.2997.
Armengot, L., Berner, A., Blanco-Moreno, J.M., Mäder, P., Sans, F.X., 2015. Long-term
feasibility of reduced tillage in organic farming. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 339–
346. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13593-014-0249-y.
Arthurson, V., 2009. Closing the global energy and nutrient cycles through
application of biogas residue to agricultural land – potential benefits and
drawback. Energies 2, 226–242. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en20200226.
Aschmann, H., 1973. Distribution and peculiarity of mediterranean ecosystems.
Mediterranean Type Ecosystems. Springer, pp. 11–19. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-65520-3_2.
Ayars, J.E., Fulton, A., Taylor, B., 2015. Subsurface drip irrigation in California—Here
to stay? Agric. Water Manag. 157, 39–47. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agwat.2015.01.001.
Bach-Faig, A., Berry, E.M., Lairon, D., Reguant, J., Trichopoulou, A., Dernini, S.,
Medina, F.X., Battino, M., Belahsen, R., Miranda, G., Serra-Majem, L.,
Mediterranean Diet Fdn Expert, G., 2011. Mediterranean diet pyramid today.
Science and cultural updates. Public Health Nutr. 14, 2274–2284.
Bai, Z.H., Ma, L., Qin, W., Chen, Q., Oenema, O., Zhang, F.S., 2014. Changes in pig
production in China and their effects on nitrogen and phosphorus use and
losses. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 12742–12749. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
es502160v.
Balota, E.L., Calegari, A., Nakatani, A.S., Coyne, M.S., 2014. Benefits of winter cover
crops and no-tillage for microbial parameters in a Brazilian Oxisol: a long-term
study. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 197, 31–40. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2014.07.010.
Barth, G., Von Tucher, S., Schmidhalter, U., 2008. Effectiveness of 3,4-
dimethylpyrazole phosphate as nitriflcation inhibitor in soil as influenced by
inhibitor concentration, application form, and soil matric potential. Pedosphere
18, 378–385.
Basche, A.D., Miguez, F.E., Kaspar, T.C., Castellano, M.J., 2014. Do cover crops increase
or decrease nitrous oxide emissions? A meta-analysis. J. Soil Water Conserv. 69,
471–482. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2489/jswc.69.6.471.
Benlhabib, O., Yazar, A., Qadir, M., Lourenço, E., Jacobsen, S.E., 2014. How can we
improve mediterranean cropping systems? J. Agron. Crop Sci. 200, 325–332.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jac.12066.
Berenguer, P., Cela, S., Santiveri, F., Boixadera, J., Lloveras, J., 2008. Copper and zinc
soil accumulation and plant concentration in irrigated maize fertilized with
liquid swine manure. Agron. J. 100, 1056. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2007.0321.
Billen, G., Garnier, J., Lassaletta, L., 2013. The nitrogen cascade from agricultural soils
to the sea: modelling nitrogen transfers at regional watershed and global scales.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 368, 20130123. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2013.0123.
Blanco-Canqui, H., Shaver, T.M., Lindquist, J.L., Shapiro, C.A., Elmore, R.W., Francis, C.
A., Hergert, G.W., 2015. Cover crops and ecosystem services: insights from
studies in temperate soils. Agron. J. 107, 2449. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj15.0086.
Blavet, D., De Noni, G., Le Bissonnais, Y., Leonard, M., Maillo, L., Laurent, J.Y., Asseline,
J., Leprun, J.C., Arshad, M.A., Roose, E., 2009. Effect of land use and management
on the early stages of soil water erosion in French Mediterranean vineyards. Soil
Tillage Res. 106, 124–136. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2009.04.010.
Bodirsky, B.L., Popp, A., Lotze-Campen, H., Dietrich, J.P., Rolinski, S., Weindl, I.,
Schmitz, C., Müller, C., Bonsch, M., Humpenöder, F., Biewald, A., Stevanovic, M.,
2014. Reactive nitrogen requirements to feed the world in 2050 and potential to
mitigate nitrogen pollution. Nat. Commun. 5 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms4858.
Boellstorff, D., Benito, G., 2005. Impacts of set-aside policy on the risk of soil erosion
in central Spain. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 107, 231–243.
Bosch-Serra, A.D., Ortiz, C., Yagüe, M.R., Boixadera, J., 2015. Strategies to optimize
nitrogen efficiency when fertilizing with pig slurries in dryland agricultural
systems. Eur. J. Agron. 67, 27–36. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
eja.2015.03.003.
Bouwman, A.F., Boumans, L.J.M., Batjes, N.H., 2002. Modeling global annual N 2 O
and NO emissions from fertilized
fields. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 16 doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2001GB001812 28-1–28-9.
Bugg, R.L., Horwath, W., Six, J., Van Horn, M., 2007. Practical soil ecology. In: Smith,
R., Gaskell, M.L., Bugg, R.L., Daugovish, O., Van Horn, M. (Eds.), “Cover Crops for
Vegetable Farming Systems’’. University of California Agriculture and Natural
Resources 8000 Series.
CEC, 1999. Commission of european communities. council directive 99/31/EC of 26
april 1999 on the landfill of waste. Off. J. Eur. Commun. 182, 1–19.
Cantero-Martínez, C., Angás, P., Lampurlanés, J., 2007. Long-term yield and water
use efficiency under various tillage systems in Mediterranean rainfed
conditions. Ann. Appl. Biol. 150, 293–305. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-
7348.2007.00142.x.
Carranca, C., Oliveira, A., Pampulha, E., Torres, M.O., 2009. Temporal dynamics of soil
nitrogen, carbon and microbial activity in conservative and disturbed
fields
amended with mature white lupine and oat residues. Geoderma 151, 50–59.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2009.03.012.
Castaldi, S., Riondino, M., Baronti, S., Esposito, F.R., Marzaioli, R., Rutigliano, F.A.,
Vaccari, F.P., Miglietta, F., 2011. Impact of biochar application to a Mediterranean
wheat crop on soil microbial activity and greenhouse gas
fluxes. Chemosphere
85, 1464–1471. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.08.031.
Cayuela, M.L., Sánchez-Monedero, M.A., Roig, A., Hanley, K., Enders, A., Lehmann, J.,
2013. Biochar and denitrification in soils: when, how much and why does
biochar reduce N2O emissions? Sci. Rep. 3 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
srep01732.
Cayuela, M.L., van Zwieten, L., Singh, B.P., Jeffery, S., Roig, A., Sánchez-Monedero, M.
A., 2014. Biochar's role in mitigating soil nitrous oxide emissions: a review and
meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 191, 5–16. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.agee.2013.10.009.
Cayuela, M.L., Jeffery, S., van Zwieten, L., 2015. The molar H:Corg ratio of biochar is a
key factor in mitigating N2O emissions from soil. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 202,
135–138. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.12.015.
Cayuela, M.L., Aguilera, E., Sanz-Cobena, A., Adams, D.C., Abalos, D., Barton, L., Ryals,
R., Silver, W.L., Alfaro, M.A., Pappa, V.A., Smith, P., Garnier, J., Billen, G.,
Bouwman, L., Bondeau, A., Lassaletta, L., 2017. Direct nitrous oxide emissions in
Mediterranean climate cropping systems: emission factors based on a metaanalysis
of available measurement data. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 238, 25–35.
Chen, Q., An, X., Li, H., Su, J., Ma, Y., Zh, u., 2016. Long-term
field application of sewage
sludge increases the abundance of antibiotic resistance genes in soil. Environ.
Int. 92–93, 1–10.
Cole, D., Todd, L., Wing, S., 2000. Concentrated swine feeding operations and public
health: a review of occupational and community health effects. Environ. Health
Perspect. 108, 685.
Davidson, E.A., Janssens, I.A., 2006. Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon
decomposition and feedbacks to climate change. Nature 440, 165–173. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature04514.
Davidson, E.A., Hart, S.C., Shanks, C.A., Firestone, M.K., 1991. Measuring gross
nitrogen mineralization, and nitrification by 15 N isotopic pool dilution in intact
soil cores. J. Soil Sci. 42, 335–349. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2389.1991.tb00413.x.
20 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
del Prado, A., Merino, P., Estavillo, J.M., Pinto, M., González-Murua, C., 2006. N2O and
NO emissions from different N sources and under a range of soil water contents.
Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst. 74, 229–243. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10705-
006-9001-6.
del Prado, A., Alvaro-Fuentes, J., Arriaga, H., Báez, D., Bernal, M.P., Cantero, C.,
Estellés, F., Merino, P., Moral, R., Pardo, G., Salcedo, G., Calvet, S., Sanz-Cobeña, A.,
2013. GHG emissions associated with manure management from livestock
systems in a Mediterranean country. A case study: spain. RAMIRAN 2013. 15th
International Conference, Versailles, France, 3–5 June. 2013. Proceedings 2013
(978-2-7380-1337-8).
Dell, C.J., Kleinman, P.J.A., Schmidt, J.P., Beegle, D.B., 2012. Low-disturbance manure
incorporation effects on ammonia and nitrate loss. J. Environ. Qual. 41, 928–937.
Dere, A.L., Stehouwer, R.C., 2011. Labile and stable nitrogen and carbon in mine soil
reclaimed with manure-Based amendments. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 75, 890. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2010.0316.
Derpsch, R., Friedrich, T., 2009. Development and current status of no-till adoption
in the World. Proceedings of the 18th Triennial Conference of the International
Soil Tillage Research Organization (ISTRO), 15–19 June. Izmir, Turkey.
Di Bene, C., Tavarini, S., Mazzoncini, M., Angelini, L.G., 2011. Changes in soil chemical
parameters and organic matter balance after 13 years of ramie [Boehmeria
nivea (L.) Gaud.] cultivation in the Mediterranean region. Eur. J. Agron. 35, 154–
163. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2011.05.007.
Di Giacomo, G., Taglieri, L., 2009. Renewable energy benefits with conversion of
woody residues to pellets. Energy 34, 724–731. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2008.08.010.
Díaz-Cruz, M., 2003. Environmental behavior and analysis of veterinary and human
drugs in soils: sediments and sludge. Trends Anal. Chem. 22, 340–351.
Ding, X., Han, X., Liang, Y., Qiao, Y., Li, L., Li, N., 2012. Changes in soil organic carbon
pools after 10 years of continuous manuring combined with chemical fertilizer
in a Mollisol in China. Soil Tillage Res. 122, 36–41. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.still.2012.02.002.
Doltra, J., Olesen, J.E., 2013. The role of catch crops in the ecological intensification of
spring cereals in organic farming under Nordic climate. Eur. J. Agron. 44, 98–
108. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2012.03.006.
Ecoinvent Centre, 2007. Ecoinvent Data v2.0. Ecoinvent Reports No. 1–25. Swiss
Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Dübendorf.
FAO, 2011a. What is Conservation Agriculture? FAO Conservation Agriculture Web-
site at: http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/1a.html.
FAO, 2011b. CA Adoption Worldwide. FAO AQUASTAT Conservation Agriculture
Web-site at: http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/6c.html.
FAO, 2014. AQUASTAT Main Database, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO).
FAOStat, 2016. FAOSTAT database collections. Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. http://faostat.fao.org.
Feilberg, A., Nyord, T., Hansen, M.N., Lindholst, S., 2011. Chemical evaluation of odor
reduction by soil injection of animal manure. J. Environ. Qual. 40 (5),1674–1682.
Fernández, J.M., Plaza, C., García-Gil, J.C., Polo, A., 2009. Biochemical properties and
barley yield in a semiarid Mediterranean soil amended with two kinds of
sewage sludge. Appl. Soil Ecol. 42, 18–24. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsoil.2009.01.006.
Ferrio, J.P., Arab, G., Bort, J., Buxó, R., Molist, M., Voltas, J., Araus, J.L., 2007. Land use
changes and crop productivity in early agriculture: comparison with current
conditions in the mid-Euphrates valley. In: Karam, F., Karaa, K., Lamaddalena, N.,
Bogliotti, C. (Eds.), Harmonization and Integration of Water Saving Options.
Convention and Promotion of Water Saving Policies and Guidelines. 5th
WASAMED Workshop (Malta, 3–7 May 2006, Options Méditerranéennes, Série
B, pp. 167–174 (No. 59).
Flavel, T.C., Murphy, D.V., Lalor, B.M., Fillery, I.R.P., 2005. Gross N mineralization
rates after application of composted grape marc to soil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 37,
1397–1400. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2004.12.003.
Flotats, X., Bonmatí, A., Fernández, B., Magrí, A., 2009. Manure treatment
technologies: on-farm versus centralized strategies. NE Spain as case study.
Biores. Technol. 100, 5519–5526.
Franco-Otero, V.G., Soler-Rovira, P., Hernández, D., López-de-Sá, E.G., Plaza, C., 2012.
Short-term effects of organic municipal wastes on wheat yield, microbial
biomass, microbial activity, and chemical properties of soil. Biol. Fertil. Soils 48,
205–216. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00374-011-0620-y.
Gabriel, J.L., Muñoz-Carpena, R., Quemada, M., 2012. The role of cover crops in
irrigated systems: water balance, nitrate leaching and soil mineral nitrogen
accumulation. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 155, 50–61. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2012.03.021.
García-Marco, S., Ravella, S.R., Chadwick, D., Vallejo, A., Gregory, A.S., Cárdenas, L.M.,
2014. Ranking factors affecting emissions of GHG from incubated agricultural
soils. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 65, 573–583. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejss.12143.
Gendebien, A., Davis, B., Hobson, J., Palfrey, R., Pitchers, R., Rumsby, P., Carlton-
Smith, C., Middleton, J., 2008. Environmental, economic and social impacts of
the use of sewage sludge on land. Summary Report 1. Assessment of Existing
Knowledge. Report Prepared by Milieu Ltd., WRc and RPA for the European
Commission, DG Environment Under Study Contract DG ENV.G.4/ETU.
Gilsanz, C., Báez, D., Misselbrook, T.H., Dhanoa, M.S., Cárdenas, L.M., 2016.
Development of emission factors and efficiency of two nitrification inhibitors,
DCD and DMPP. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 216, 1–8. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.agee.2015.09.030.
González-Sánchez, E.J., Ordóñez-Fernández, R., Carbonell-Bojollo, R., Veroz-
González, O., Gil-Ribes, J.A., 2012. Meta-analysis on atmospheric carbon capture
in Spain through the use of conservation agriculture. Soil Tillage Res.122, 52–60.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2012.03.001.
González-Sánchez, E.J., Veroz-Gonzalez, O., Blanco-Roldan, G.L., Marquez-Garcia, F.,
Carbonell-Bojollo, R., 2015. A renewed view of conservation agriculture and its
evolution over the last decade in Spain. Soil Tillage Res. 146, 204–212.
Granlund, K., Rankinen, K., Etheridge, R., Seuri, P., Lehtoranta, J., 2015. Ecological
recycling agriculture can reduce inorganic nitrogen losses -model results from
three Finnish catchments. Agric. Syst. 133, 167–176. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agsy.2014.10.015.
Grizzetti, B., Pretato, U., Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Garnier, J., 2013. The contribution of
food waste to global and European nitrogen pollution. Environ. Sci. Policy 33,
186–195. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2013.05.013.
Guardia, G., Tellez-Rio, A., García-Marco, S., Martin-Lammerding, D., Tenorio, J.L.,
Ibáñez, M.Á., Vallejo, A., 2016. Effect of tillage and crop (cereal versus legume)
on greenhouse gas emissions and Global Warming Potential in a non-irrigated
Mediterranean
field. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 221, 187–197. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.01.047.
Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., Otterdijk, R., Meybeck, A., 2011. Global
Food Losses and Food Waste?extent, Causes and Prevention. Study Conducted
Forthe International Congress SAVE FOOD! At Interpack Düsseldorf, Germany.
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, pp. 2011.
Heller, H., Bar-Tal, A., Tamir, G., Bloom, P., Venterea, R.T., Chen, D., Zhang, Y., Clapp, C.
E., Fine, P., 2010. Effects of manure and cultivation on carbon dioxide and nitrous
oxide emissions from a corn
field under mediterranean conditions. J. Environ.
Qual. 39, 437. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/jeq2009.0027.
Hernanz, J., López, R., Navarrete, L., Sánchez-Girón, V., 2002. Long-term effects of
tillage systems and rotations on soil structural stability and organic carbon
stratification in semiarid central Spain. Soil Tillage Res. 66, 129–141. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0167-1987(02)00021-1.
Holland, J.M., 2004. The environmental consequences of adopting conservation
tillage in Europe: reviewing the evidence. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.103,1–25. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2003.12.018.
Hou, Y., Velthof, G.L., Oenema, O., 2015. Mitigation of ammonia, nitrous oxide and
methane emissions from manure management chains: a meta-analysis and
integrated assessment. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1293–1312. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/gcb.12767.
Huérfano, X., Fuertes-Mendizábal, T., Duñabeitia, M.K., González-Murua, C.,
Estavillo, J.M., Menéndez, S., 2015. Splitting the application of 3,4-
dimethylpyrazole phosphate (DMPP): Influence on greenhouse gases emissions
and wheat yield and quality under humid Mediterranean conditions. Eur. J.
Agron. 64, 47–57. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2014.11.008.
Hussain, M., Farooq, M., Nawaz, A., Al-Sadi, A.M., Solaiman, Z.M., Alghamdi, S.S.,
Ammara, U., Ok, Y.S., Siddique, K.H.M., 2016. Biochar for crop production:
potential benefits and risks. J. Soils Sediments doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11368-016-1360-2.
IPCC, 2006. Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Prepared by the
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme. IGES, Japan.
Ingram, J., Mills, J., Frelih-Larsen, A., Davis, M., Merante, P., Ringrose, S., Molnar, A.,
Sánchez, B., Ghaley, B.B., Karaczun, Z., 2014. Managing soil organic carbon: a
farm perspective. EuroChoices 13, 12–19. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1746-
692x.12057.
Jordán, A., Zavala, L.M., Gil, J., 2010. Effects of mulching on soil physical properties
and runoff under semi-arid conditions in southern Spain. CATENA 81, 77–85.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2010.01.007.
Küçükdogan, A., Güven, B., Balcıoglu, I., 2015. Mapping the environmental risk of
antibiotic contamination by using multi-Criteria decision analysis. Clean Soil Air
Water 43, 1316–1326.
Kala9c, P., 2012. Carotenoids, ergosterol and tocopherols in fresh and preserved
herbage and their transfer to bovine milk fat and adipose tissues: a review. J.
Agrobiol. 29, 1–13. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/v10146-012-0001-7.
Kallenbach, C.M., Rolston, D.E., Horwath, W.R., 2010. Cover cropping affects soil N2O
and CO2 emissions differently depending on type of irrigation. Agric. Ecosyst.
Environ. 137, 251–260. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2010.02.010.
Kassam, A., Friedrich, T., Derpsch, R., Lahmar, R., Mrabet, R., Basch, G., González-
Sánchez, E.J., Serraj, R., 2012. Conservation agriculture in the dry Mediterranean
climate. F. Crop. Res. 132, 7–17. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2012.02.023.
Kennedy, T.L., Suddick, E.C., Six, J., 2013. Reduced nitrous oxide emissions and
increased yields in California tomato cropping systems under drip irrigation
and fertigation. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 170, 16–27. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2013.02.002.
Kessel, C., Venterea, R., Six, J., Adviento-Borbe, M.A., Linquist, B., Groenigen, K.J.,
2013. Climate, duration, and N placement determine N2O emissions in reduced
tillage systems: a meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 19, 33–44. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2012.02779.x.
Kim, D.-G., Hernandez-Ramirez, G., Giltrap, D., 2013. Linear and nonlinear
dependency of direct nitrous oxide emissions on fertilizer nitrogen input: a
meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 168, 53–65. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2012.02.021.
Kleber, M., Nikolaus, P., Kuzyakov, Y., Stahr, K., 2000. Formation of mineral N (NH4+,
NO3-) during mineralization of organic matter from coal refuse material and
municipal sludge. J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci. 163, 73–80. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/(SICI)1522-2624(200002)163:1<73:AID-JPLN73>3.0.CO;2-S.
Klee, N., Gustavsson, L., Kosmehl, T., Engwall, M., Erdinger, L., Braunbeck, T., Hollert,
H., 2004. Changes in toxicity and genotoxicity of industrial sewage sludge
samples containing nitro- and amino-aromatic compounds following
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 21
treatment in bioreactors with different oxygen regimes. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
11, 313–320. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/bf02979645.
Kool, D.M., Dolfing, J., Wrage, N., Van Groenigen, J.W., 2011. Nitrifier denitrification
as a distinct and significant source of nitrous oxide from soil. Soil Biol. Biochem.
43, 174–178. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2010.09.030.
Kudo, Y., Noborio, K., Shimoozono, N., Kurihara, R., 2014. The effective water
management practice for mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and maintaining
rice yield in central Japan. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 186, 77–85. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.01.015.
López-Bellido, L., López-Garrido, F.J., Fuentes, M., Castillo, J.E., Fernández, E.J., 1997.
Influence of tillage, crop rotation and nitrogen fertilization on soil organic
matter and nitrogen under rain-fed Mediterranean conditions. Soil Tillage Res.
43, 277–293. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0167-1987(97)00018-4.
López-Bellido, L., López-Bellido, R.J., Castillo, J.E., López-Bellido, F.J., 2000. Effects of
tillage, crop rotation, and nitrogen fertilization on wheat under rainfed
mediterranean conditions. Agron. J. 92, 1054. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2000.9261054x.
López-Bellido, R.J., Fontán, J.M., López-Bellido, F.J., López-Bellido, L., 2010. Carbon
sequestration by tillage, rotation, and nitrogen fertilization in a Mediterranean
Vertisol. Agron. J. 102, 310–318.
López-Fando, C., Almendros, G., 1995. Interactive effects of tillage and crop rotations
on yield and chemical properties of soils in semi-arid central Spain. Soil Tillage
Res. 36, 45–57. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0167-1987(95)00495-5.
Lahmar, R., 2010. Adoption of conservation agriculture in Europe: lessons of the
KASSA project. Land Use Policy 27, 4–10.
Lal, R., 2004. Carbon emission from farm operations. Environ. Int. 30, 981–990.
Lal, R., 2011. Sequestering carbon in soils of agro-ecosystems. Food Policy 36, S33–
S39. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2010.12.001.
Lamb, A., Green, R., Bateman, I., Broadmeadow, M., Bruce, T., Burney, J., Carey, P.,
Chadwick, D., Crane, E., Field, R., Goulding, K., Griffiths, H., Hastings, A., Kasoar,
T., Kindred, D., Phalan, B., Pickett, J., Smith, P., Wall, E., zu Ermgassen, E.K.H.J.,
Balmford, A., 2016. The potential for land sparing to offset greenhouse gas
emissions from agriculture. Nat. Clim. Change doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2910.
Lampurlanés, J., Plaza-Bonilla, D., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cantero-Martínez, C., 2016.
Long-term analysis of soil water conservation and crop yield under different
tillage systems in Mediterranean rainfed conditions. Food Crop. Res. 189, 59–67.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2016.02.010.
Lassaletta, L., Aguilera, E., 2015. Soil carbon sequestration is a climate stabilization
wedge: comments on Sommer and Bossio (2014). J. Environ. Manage. 153, 48–
49. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.01.038.
Lassaletta, L., Romero, E., Billen, G., Garnier, J., García-Gómez, H., Rovira, J.V., 2012.
Spatialized N budgets in a large agricultural Mediterranean watershed: high
loading and low transfer. Biogeosciences 9, 57–70. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.5194/bg-9-57-2012.
Lassaletta, L., Aguilera, E., Sanz-Cobena, A., Pardo, G., Billen, G., Garnier, J., Grizzetti,
B., 2014a. Leakage of nitrous oxide emissions within the Spanish agro-food
system in 1961–2009. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change 1–20. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9569-0.
Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Grizzetti, B., Garnier, J., Leach, A., Galloway, J., 2014b. Food
and feed trade as a driver in the global nitrogen cycle: 50-year trends.
Biogeochemistry 118, 225–241. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-013-
9923-4.
Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Romero, E., Garnier, J., Aguilera, E., 2014c. How changes in
diet and trade patterns have shaped the N cycle at the national scale: spain
(1961–2009). Reg. Environ. Chang. 14, 785–797. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10113-013-0536-1.
Le Mer, J., Roger, P., 2001. Production, oxidation, emission and consumption of
methane by soils: a review. Eur. J. Soil Biol. 37, 25–50. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/s1164-5563(01)01067-6.
Leip, A., Busto, M., Corazza, M., Bergamaschi, P., Koeble, R., Dechow, R., Monni, S., de
Vries, W., 2011. Estimation of N2O
fluxes at the regional scale: data, models,
challenges. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 3, 328–338. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.cosust.2011.07.002.
Lesschen, J.P., van den Berg, M., Westhoek, H.J., Witzke, H.P., Oenema, O., 2011.
Greenhouse gas emission profiles of European livestock sectors. Anim. Feed Sci.
Technol. 166-167, 16–28.
Liang, K., Zhong, X., Huang, N., Lampayan, R.M., Pan, J., Tian, K., Liu, Y., 2016. Grain
yield, water productivity and CH4 emission of irrigated rice in response to water
management in south China. Agric. Water Manag. 163, 319–331. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2015.10.015.
Linzmeier, W., Gutser, R., Schmidhalter, U., 2001. Nitrous oxide emission from soil
and from a nitrogen-15-labelled fertilizer with the new nitrification inhibitor
3,4-dimethylpyrazole phosphate (DMPP). Biol. Fertil. Soils 34, 103–108. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s003740100383.
Llewellyn, R.S., D’Emden, F., Gobbett, D., 2009. Adoption of no-till and conservation
farming practices in Australian grain growing regions: current status and
trends. Preliminary Report for South Australia No-Till Farmers Association
(SANTFA) and CA AANZ, 26 January .
Luna, J.M., Mitchell, J.P., Shrestha, A., 2012. Conservation tillage for organic
agriculture: evolution toward hybrid systems in the western USA. Renew. Agric.
Food Syst. 27, 21–30. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1742170511000494.
MAGRAMA, 2014. Inventario de emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero de España
1990–2012. Madrid.
MERMA, 2010. Encuesta Nacional de Superficies y Rendimientos. Análisis de las
técnicas de mantenimiento del suelo y méto-dos de siembra en Espãna 2010.
Viewed 4 July 2011 at: http://www.marm.es/es/estadistica/temas/encuesta-
sobre-superficies-y-rendimientos-de-cultivos-esyrce-/
EstudioMantenimientoSuelo2010tcm7-147011.pdf.
Marsden, K.A., Scowen, M., Hill, P.W., Jones, D.L., Chadwick, D.R., 2015. Plant
acquisition and metabolism of the synthetic nitrification inhibitor
dicyandiamide and naturally-occurring guanidine from agricultural soils. Plant
Soil 395, 201–214. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-015-2549-7.
Martin-Rueda, I., Muñoz-Guerra, L.M., Yunta, F., Esteban, E., Tenorio, J.L., Lucena, J.J.,
2007. Tillage and crop rotation effects on barley yield and soil nutrients on a
Calciortidic Haploxeralf. Soil Tillage Res. 92,1–9. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
still.2005.10.006.
Martiniello, P., Teixeira da Silva, J.A., 2011. Physiological and bio-agronomical
aspects involved in growth and yield components of cultivated forage species in
Mediterranean environments: a review. Eur. J. Plant Sci. Biotechnol. 5, 64–98.
Masri, Z., Ryan, J., 2006. Soil organic matter and related physical properties in a
Mediterranean wheat-based rotation trial. Soil Tillage Res. 87, 146–154. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2005.03.003.
Meijide, A., Díez, J.A., Sánchez-Martín, L., López-Fernández, S., Vallejo, A., 2007.
Nitrogen oxide emissions from an irrigated maize crop amended with treated
pig slurries and composts in a Mediterranean climate. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
121, 383–394. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2006.11.020.
Meijide, A., García-Torres, L., Arce, A., Vallejo, A., 2009. Nitrogen oxide emissions
affected by organic fertilization in a non-irrigated Mediterranean barley
field.
Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 132, 106–115. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2009.03.005.
Meijide, A., Cárdenas, L.M., Sánchez-Martín, L., Vallejo, A., 2010. Carbon dioxide and
methane
fluxes from a barley
field amended with organic fertilizers under
Mediterranean climatic conditions. Plant Soil 328, 353–367. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11104-009-0114-y.
Meijide, A., Gruening, C., Goded, I., Seufert, G., Cescatti, A., 2017. Water management
reduces greenhouse gas emissions in a Mediterranean rice paddy
field. Agric.
Ecosyst. Environ. 238, 168–178.
Miguez, F.E., Bollero, G.A., 2005. Review of corn yield response under winter cover
cropping systems using meta-analytic methods. Crop Sci. 45, 2318–2329.
Molina-Alcaide, E., Yáñez-Ruiz, D.R., 2008. Potential use of olive by-products in
ruminant feeding: a review. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 147, 247–264.
Naylor, R., Steinfeld, H., Falcon, W., Galloway, J., Smil, V., Bradford, E., Alder, J.,
Mooney, H., 2005. Agriculture. Losing the links between livestock and land.
Science 310 (80), 1621–1622. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1117856.
Nelissen, V., Saha, B.K., Ruysschaert, G., Boeckx, P., 2014. Effect of different biochar
and fertilizer types on N2O and NO emissions. Soil Biol. Biochem. 70, 244–255.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2013.12.026.
Pannell, D.J., 2008. Public benefits, private benefits, and policy mechanism choice
for land-Use change for environmental benefits. Land Econ. 84, 225–240. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3368/le.84.2.225.
Papadakis, J., 1966. Climates of the World and Their Agricultural Potentialities.
DAPCO, Rome, Italy.
Pardo, G., Moral, R., del Prado, A., 2013. Modelling management options of organic
waste for the evaluation of synergies and trade-offs between climate change
mitigation and ecosystem services. Proceeding of the 15th RAMIRAN
International Conference, INRA – Université de Versailles St-Quentin-en-
Yvellines, Versailles.
Pardo, G., Moral, R., Aguilera, E., del Prado, A., 2015. Gaseous emissions from
management of solid waste: a systematic review. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1313–
1327. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12806.
Pardo, G., del Prado, A., Martinez-Mena, M.A., Bustamante, J.A., Rodriguez-Martín, J.,
Alvaro-Fuentes, J., Moral, R., 2017. Orchard and horticulture systems in Spanish
Mediterranean coastal areas: Is there a real possibility to contribute to C
sequestration? Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 238, 153–167.
Parfitt, J., Barthel, M., Macnaughton, S., 2010. Food waste within food supply chains:
quantification and potential for change to 2050. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 365, 3065–3081.
Pellegrino, E., Di Bene, C., Tozzini, C., Bonari, E., 2011. Impact on soil quality of a 10-
year-old short-rotation coppice poplar stand compared with intensive
agricultural and uncultivated systems in a Mediterranean area. Agric. Ecosyst.
Environ. 140, 245–254. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2010.12.011.
Peltre, C., Nyord, T., Bruun, S., Jensen, L.S., Magid, J., 2015. Repeated soil application
of organic waste amendments reduces draught force and fuel consumption for
soil tillage. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 211, 94–101. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2015.06.004.
Penuelas, J., Sardans, J., Alcaniz, J.M., Poch, J.M., 2009. Increased eutrophication and
nutrient imbalances in the agricultural soil of NE Catalonia, Spain. J. Environ.
Biol. 30, 841–846.
Pereira, L.S., Oweis, T., Zairi, A., 2002. Irrigation management under water scarcity.
Agric. Water Manage. 57, 175–206.
Pereira, E.I.P., Suddick, E.C., Mansour, I., Mukome, F.N.D., Parikh, S.J., Scow, K., Six, J.,
2015. Biochar alters nitrogen transformations but has minimal effects on
nitrous oxide emissions in an organically managed lettuce mesocosm. Biol.
Fertil. Soils 51, 573–582. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00374-015-1004-5.
Philibert, A., Loyce, C., Makowski, D., 2012. Assessment of the quality of metaanalysis
in agronomy. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 148, 72–82. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2011.12.003.
Pittelkow, C.M., Linquist, B.A., Lundy, M.E., Liang, X., van Groenigen, K.J., Lee, J., van
Gestel, N., Six, J., Venterea, R.T., van Kessel, C., 2014. When does no-till yield
more? A global meta-analysis. F. Crop. Res. 183, 156–168. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.fcr.2015.07.020.
22 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Cantero-Martínez, C., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., 2010. Tillage effects on
soil aggregation and soil organic carbon profile distribution under
Mediterranean semi-arid conditions. Soil Use Manage. 26, 465–474. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-2743.2010.00298.x.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cantero-Martínez, C., 2013a. Soil aggregate
stability as affected by fertilization type under semiarid no-tillage conditions.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 77 (1), 284–292.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Cantero-Martínez, C., Viñas, P., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., 2013b. Soil
aggregation and organic carbon protection in a no-tillage chronosequence
under Mediterranean conditions. Geoderma 193-194, 76–82. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2012.10.022.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Arrúe, J.L., Cantero-Martínez, C., 2014a. Tillage
and nitrogen fertilization effects on nitrous oxide yield-scaled emissions in a
rainfed Mediterranean area. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 189, 43–52. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.03.023.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Cantero-Martínez, C., Bareche, J., Arrúe, J.L., Álvaro-Fuentes, J.,
2014b. Soil carbon dioxide and methane
fluxes as affected by tillage and N
fertilization in dryland conditions. Plant Soil 381, 111–130. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11104-014-2115-8.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Arrúe, J.L., Cantero-Martínez, C., Fanlo, R., Iglesias, A., Álvaro-
Fuentes, J., 2015. Carbon management in dryland agricultural systems. A review.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35, 1319–1334. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13593-015-
0326-x.
Plaza-Bonilla, D., Nolot, J.-M., Passot, S., Raffaillac, D., Justes, E., 2016. Grain legumebased
rotations managed under conventional tillage need cover crops to
mitigate soil organic matter losses. Soil Tillage Res. 156, 33–43. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2015.09.021.
Poeplau, C., Don, A., 2015. Carbon sequestration in agricultural soils via cultivation
of cover crops – a meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 200, 33–41. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.10.024.
Powlson, D.S., Whitmore, A.P., Goulding, K.W.T., 2011. Soil carbon sequestration to
mitigate climate change: a critical re-examination to identify the true and the
false. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 62, 42–55. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2389.2010.01342.x.
Qiao, C., Liu, L., Hu, S., Compton, J.E., Greaver, T.L., Li, Q., 2015. How inhibiting
nitrification affects nitrogen cycle and reduces environmental impacts of
anthropogenic nitrogen input. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1249–1257. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12802.
Quemada, M., Cabrera, M.L., 2002. Characteristic moisture curves and maximum
water content of two crop residues. Plant Soil 238, 295–299. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/A:1014404003851.
Quemada, M., Baranski, M., Nobel de Lange, M., Vallejo, A., Cooper, J., 2013. Practices
to reduce nitrate leaching and increase nitrogen use efficiency in irrigated
agriculture. General Assembly Conference, Abstracts, Viena, pp. 4472.
Rizzo, A., Boano, F., Revelli, R., Ridolfi, L., 2013. Role of water
flow in modeling
methane emissions from
flooded paddy soils. Adv. Water Resour. 52, 261–274.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.11.016.
Rizzo, A., Boano, F., Revelli, R., Ridolfi, L., 2015. Groundwater impact on methane
emissions from
flooded paddy
fields. Adv. Water Resour. 83, 340–350. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2015.07.005.
Robertson, G., Paul, E., Harwood, R., 2000. Greenhouse gases in intensive
agriculture: contributions of individual gases to the radiative forcing of the
atmosphere. Science 80 (289), 1922–1925. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.289.5486.1922.
Robinson, A., Di, H.J., Cameron, K.C., Podolyan, A., He, J., 2014. The effect of soil pH
and dicyandiamide (DCD) on N2O emissions and ammonia oxidiser abundance
in a stimulated grazed pasture soil. J. Soils Sediments 14, 1434–1444. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11368-014-0888-2.
Rochette, P., 2008. No-till only increases N2O emissions in poorly-aerated soils. Soil
Tillage Res. 101, 97–100. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2008.07.011.
Rochon, J.J., Doyle, C.J., Greef, J.M., Hopkins, A., Molle, G., Sitzia, M., Scholefield, D.,
Smith, C.J., 2004. Grazing legumes in Europe: a review of their status,
management, benefits, research needs and future prospects. Grass Forage Sci.
59, 197–214. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2494.2004.00423.x.
Roelle, P.A., Aneja, V.P., 2002. Nitric oxide emissions from soils amended with
municipal waste biosolids. Atmos. Environ. 36, 137–147. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/s1352-2310(01)00415-0 (METER: http://pub.epsilon.slu.se/671/1/
Agraria482.pdf).
Ryan, J., Ibrikci, H., Sommer, R., McNeill, A., 2009. Chapter 2 nitrogen in rainfed and
irrigated cropping systems in the mediterranean region. Adv. Agron. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113(09)04002-4.
Sáez-Almendros, S., Obrador, B., Bach-Faig, A., Serra-Majem, L., 2013. Environmental
footprints of Mediterranean versus Western dietary patterns: beyond the
health benefits of the Mediterranean diet. Environ. Heal. 12 (118) doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1186/1476-069x-12-118.
Sánchez, B., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Cunningham, R., Iglesias, A., 2014. Towards
mitigation of greenhouse gases by small changes in farming practices:
understanding local barriers in Spain. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9562-7.
Sánchez, B., Iglesias, A., McVittie, A., Álvaro-Fuentes, J., Ingram, J., Mills, J., Lesschen,
J.P., Kuikman, P.J., 2016. Management of agricultural soils for greenhouse gas
mitigation: learning from a case study in NE Spain. J. Environ. Manage. 170, 37–
49. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.01.003.
Sánchez-García, M., Roig, A., Sánchez-Monedero, M.A., Cayuela, M.L., 2014. Biochar
increases soil N2O emissions produced by nitrification-mediated pathways.
Front. Environ. Sci. 2, 1–10. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2014.00025.
Sánchez-García, M., Sánchez-Monedero, M.A., Roig, A., López-Cano, I., Moreno, B.,
Benitez, E., Cayuela, M.L., 2016. Compost vs biochar amendment: a two-year
field study evaluating soil C build-up and N dynamics in an organically managed
olive crop. Plant Soil doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-016-2794-4.
Sánchez-Girón, V., Serrano, A., Hernanz, J.L., Navarrete, L., 2004. Economic
assessment of three long-term tillage systems for rainfed cereal and legume
production in semiarid central Spain. Soil Tillage Res. 78, 35–44.
Sánchez-Martín, L., Vallejo, A., Dick, J., Skiba, M., 2008. The influence of soluble
carbon and fertilizer nitrogen on nitric oxide and nitrous oxide emissions from
two contrasting agricultural soils. Soil Biol. Biochem. 40, 142–151. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2007.07.016.
Sánchez-Martín, L., Meijide, A., Garcia-Torres, L., Vallejo, A., 2010a. Combination of
drip irrigation and organic fertilizer for mitigating emissions of nitrogen oxides
in semiarid climate. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 137, 99–107. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.agee.2010.01.006.
Sánchez-Martín, L., Sanz-Cobena, A., Meijide, A., Quemada, M., Vallejo, A., 2010b.
The importance of the fallow period for N2O and CH4
fluxes and nitrate leaching
in a Mediterranean irrigated agroecosystem. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 61, 710–720. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2389.2010.01278.x.
Sanchis, E., Ferrer, M., Torres, G., Cambra-López, M., Calvet, S., 2012. Effect of water
and straw management practices on methane emissions from rice
fields: a
review through a meta-analysis. Environ. Eng. Sci. 29, 12.
Sans, F.X., Berner, A., Armengot, L., Mäder, P., 2011. Tillage effects on weed
communities in an organic winter wheat-sunflower-spelt cropping sequence.
Weed Res. 51, 413–421. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3180.2011.00859.x.
Santos, A., Bustamante, M.A., Moral, R., Bernal, M.P., 2016. Carbon conservation
strategy for the management of pig slurry by composting: initial study of the
bulking agent influence. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change 21, 1093–1106.
Sanz, A., Misselbrook, T., Sanz, M.J., Vallejo, A., 2010. Use of an inverse dispersion
technique for estimating ammonia emission from surface-applied slurry.
Atmos. Environ. 44, 999–1002.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Misselbrook, T.H., Arce, A., Mingot, J.I., Diez, J.A., Vallejo, A., 2008.
An inhibitor of urease activity effectively reduces ammonia emissions from soil
treated with urea under Mediterranean conditions. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 126,
243–249.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Sánchez-Martín, L., García-Torres, L., Vallejo, A., 2012. Gaseous
emissions of N 2 O and NO and NO 3- leaching from urea applied with urease
and nitrification inhibitors to a maize (Zea mays) crop. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
149, 64–73.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Abalos, D., Meijide, A., Sanchez-Martin, L., Vallejo, A., 2014a. Soil
moisture determines the effectiveness of two urease inhibitors to decrease N2O
emission. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11027-014-9548-5.
Sanz-Cobena, A., García-Marco, S., Quemada, M., Gabriel, J.L., Almendros, P., Vallejo,
A., 2014b. Do cover crops enhance N2O, CO2 or CH4 emissions from soil in
Mediterranean arable systems? Sci. Total Environ. 466-467, 164–174. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.07.023.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Lassaletta, L., Estellés, F., Del Prado, A., Guardia, G., Abalos, D.,
Aguilera, E., Pardo, G., Vallejo, A., Sutton, M.A., Garnier, J., Billen, G., 2014c. Yieldscaled
mitigation of ammonia emission from N fertilization: the Spanish case.
Environ. Res. Lett. 9, 125005. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/9/12/
125005.
Sanz-Cobena, A., Abalos, D., Meijide, A., Sanchez-Martin, L., Vallejo, A., 2016. Soil
moisture determines the effectiveness of two urease inhibitors to decrease N2O
emission. Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Chang. 21, 1131–1144. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11027-014-9548-5.
Sasu-Boakye, Y., Cederberg, C., Wirsenius, S., 2014. Localising livestock protein feed
production and the impact on land use and greenhouse gas emissions. Animal 8,
1339–1348. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1751731114001293.
Saviozzi, A., Levi-Minzi, R., Cardelli, R., Biasci, A., Riffaldi, R., 2001. Suitability of
moist olive pomace as soil amendment. Water. Air. Soil Pollut. 128, 13–22. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1010361807181.
Schellenberg, D.L., Alsina, M.M., Muhammad, S., Stockert, C.M., Wolff, M.W., Sanden,
B.L., Brown, P.H., Smart, D.R., 2012. Yield-scaled global warming potential from
N2O emissions and CH4 oxidation for almond (Prunus dulcis) irrigated with
nitrogen fertilizers on arid land. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.155, 7–15. doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2012.03.008.
Shcherbak, I., Millar, N., Robertson, G.P., 2014. Global metaanalysis of the nonlinear
response of soil nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions to fertilizer nitrogen. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 111, 9199–9204. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1322434111.
Sisquella, M., Lloveras, J., Álvaro, J., Santiveri, P., Cantero, C. 2004. Técnicas de cultivo
para la producción de maíz, trigo y alfalfa en regadíos del valle del Ebro.
Proyecto TRAMA-LIFE. Ed. Fundació Catalana de Cooperació, Lleida, Spain. pp.
105. ISBN: 8468878669.
Six, J., Bossuyt, H., Degryze, S., Denef, K., 2004. A history of research on the link
between (micro)aggregates, soil biota, and soil organic matter dynamics. Soil
Tillage Res. 79, 7–31. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2004.03.008.
SmartSOIL, 2015. SmartSOIL Fact sheets providing technical and economic
information on
five practices that promote good soil carbon management: crop
rotation, residue management, adding manure or compost, cover and catch
crops, and conservation agriculture. EU-FP7 SmartSOIL Project – 289694, .
http://smartsoil.eu/smartsoil-toolbox/factsheets/.
Smith, P., Olesen, J.E., 2010. Synergies between the mitigation of, and adaptation to,
climate change in agriculture. J. Agric. Sci. 148, 543–552. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1017/s0021859610000341.
A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24 23
Snyder, C.S., Bruulsema, T.W., Jensen, T.L., Fixen, P.E., 2009. Review of greenhouse gas
emissions from crop production systems and fertilizer management effects.
Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 133, 247–266. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2009.04.021.
Soane, B.D., Ball, B.C., Arvidsson, J., Basch, G., Moreno, F., Roger-Estrade, J., 2012. No-
till in northern, western and south-western Europe: a review of problems and
opportunities for crop production and the environment. Soil Tillage Res. 118,
66–87. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2011.10.015.
Song, U., Lee, E.J., 2010. Environmental and economical assessment of sewage sludge
compost application on soil and plants in a landfill. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 54,
1109–1116. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2010.03.005.
Soussana, J.-F., Lemaire, G., 2014. Coupling carbon and nitrogen cycles for
environmentally sustainable intensification of grasslands and crop-livestock
systems. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 190, 9–17. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2013.10.012.
Spinelli, R., Picchi, G., 2010. Industrial harvesting of olive tree pruning residue for
energy biomass. Bioresour. Technol. 101, 730–735. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2009.08.039.
Suddick, E.C., Six, J., 2013. An estimation of annual nitrous oxide emissions and soil
quality following the amendment of high temperature walnut shell biochar and
compost to a small scale vegetable crop rotation. Sci. Total Environ. 465, 298–
307. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.094.
Suddick, E.C., Scow, K.M., Horwath, W.R., Jackson, L.E., Smart, D.R., Mitchell, J., Six, J.,
2010. The potential for california agricultural crop soils to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. Adv. Agron. 123–162. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113
(10)07004-5.
Sutton, M.A., Howard, C., Reis, S., Abalos, D., Bracher, A., Bryukhanov, A., Condor-
Golec, R.D., Kozlova, N., Lalor, S.T.J., Menzi, H., Maximov, D., Misselbrook, T.,
Raaflaub, M., Sanz-Cobena, A., von Atzigen-Sollberger, E., Spring, P., Vallejo, A.,
Wade, B., 2015. Country case studies. In: Reis, S., Howard, C., Sutton, M.A., Stefan,
R., Howard, C., Sutton, M. (Eds.), Costs of Ammonia Abatement and the Climate
Co-Benefits. Springer, Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 169–231. doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-017-9722-1_8.
Tarrasón, D., Ojeda, G., Ortiz, O., Alcañiz, J.M., 2008. Differences on nitrogen
availability in a soil amended with fresh, composted and thermally-dried
sewage sludge. Bioresour. Technol. 99, 252–259. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2006.12.023.
Tate, K.R., 2015. Soil methane oxidation and land-use change -from process to
mitigation. Soil Biol. Biochem. 80, 260–272. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
soilbio.2014.10.010.
Teira-Esmatges, M.R., Flotats, X., 2003. A method for livestock waste management
planning in NE Spain. Waste Manag. 23, 917–932.
Tellez-Rio, A., García-Marco, S., Navas, M., López-Solanilla, E., Tenorio, J.L., Vallejo, A.,
2015. N2O and CH4 emissions from a fallow-wheat rotation with low N input in
conservation and conventional tillage under a Mediterranean agroecosystem.
Sci. Total Environ. 508, 85–94. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2014.11.041.
Thompson, T.L., Doerge, T.A., Godin, R.E., 2000. Nitrogen and water interactions in
subsurface drip-irrigated cauliflower II. Agron. Econ. Environ. Outcomes Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. J. 64, 406–411.
Thorman, R.E., Chadwick, D.R., Harrison, R., Boyles, L.O., Matthews, R., 2007. The
effect on N2O emissions of storage conditions and rapid incorporation of pig
and cattle farmyard manure into tillage land. Biosyst. Eng. 97, 501–511. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2007.03.039.
Timilsena, Y.P., Adhikari, R., Casey, P., Muster, T., Gill, H., Adhikari, B., 2015. Enhanced
efficiency fertilisers: a review of formulation and nutrient release patterns. J.
Sci. Food Agric. 95, 1131–1142. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.6812.
Tonitto, C., David, M.B., Drinkwater, L.E., 2006. Replacing bare fallows with cover
crops in fertilizer-intensive cropping systems: a meta-analysis of crop yield and
N dynamics. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 112, 58–72.
Triberti, L., Nastri, A., Baldoni, G., 2016. Long-term effects of crop rotation, manure
and mineral fertilisation on carbon sequestration and soil fertility. Eur. J. Agron.
74, 47–55. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.11.024 (METER REF http://
thericejournal.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/1939-8433-5-5).
Vallejo, A., García-Torres, L., Díez, J.A., Arce, A., López-Fernández, S., 2005.
Comparison of N losses (NO
3, N 2O, NO) from surface applied, injected or
amended (DCD) pig slurry of an irrigated soil in a Mediterranean climate. Plant
Soil 272, 313–325. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-004-5754-3.
Vallejo, A., Meijide, A., Boeckx, P., Arce, A., García-torres, L., Aguado, P.L., Sanchezmartin,
L., 2014. Nitrous oxide and methane emissions from a surface dripirrigated
system combined with fertilizer management. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 65, 386–
395. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejss.12140.
van Grinsven, H.J.M., Spiertz, J.H.J., Westhoek, H.J., Bouwman, A.F., Erisman, J.W.,
2014. Nitrogen use and food production in European regions from a global
perspective. J. Agric. Sci. 152, 9–19. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
s0021859613000853.
van Grinsven, H.J.M., Erisman, J.W., de Vries, W., Westhoek, H., 2015. Potential of
extensification of European agriculture for a more sustainable food system,
focusing on nitrogen. Environ. Res. Lett. 10, 025002. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1088/1748-9326/10/2/025002.
VanderZaag, A.C., Jayasundara, S., Wagner-Riddle, C., 2011. Strategies to mitigate
nitrous oxide emissions from land applied manure. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol.
166-167, 464–479. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anifeedsci.2011.04.034.
Vanham, D., Bouraoui, F., Leip, A., Grizzetti, B., Bidoglio, G., 2015. Lost water and
nitrogen resources due to EU consumer food waste. Environ. Res. Lett. 10,
084008. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084008.
Veenstra, J.J., Horwath, W.R., Mitchell, J.P., 2007. Tillage and cover cropping effects
on aggregate-protected carbon in cotton and tomato. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 71,
362–371.
Velthof, G., Kuikman, P., Oenema, O., 2003. Nitrous oxide emission from animal
manures applied to soil under controlled conditions. Biol. Fertil. Soils 37, 221–
230. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00374-003-0589-2.
Viguria, M., Sanz-Cobeña, A., López, D.M., Arriaga, H., Merino, P., 2015. Ammonia and
greenhouse gases emission from impermeable covered storage and land
application of cattle slurry to bare soil. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 199, 261–271.
Webb, J., Chadwick, D., Ellis, S., 2004. Emissions of ammonia and nitrous oxide
following rapid incorporation of farmyard manures stored at different densities.
Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst. 70, 67–76.
Webb, J., Pain, B., Bittman, S., Morgan, J., 2010. The impacts of manure application
methods on emissions of ammonia, nitrous oxide and on crop response—a
review. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 137, 39–46. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2010.01.001.
Westhoek, H.,Lesschen, J.P.,Rood, T., Wagner, S., De Marco,A., Murphy-Bokern,D., Leip,
A., van Grinsven, H., Sutton, M.A., Oenema, O., 2014. Food choices, health and
environment: effects of cutting Europe's meat and dairy intake. Glob. Environ.
Change 26, 196–205. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.02.004.
Woolf, D., Amonette, J.E., Street-Perrott, F.A., Lehmann, J., Joseph, S., 2010.
Sustainable biochar to mitigate global climate change. Nat. Commun. 1,1–9. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1053.
Yagüe, M.R., Quílez, D., 2010. Cumulative and residual effects of swine slurry and
mineral nitrogen in irrigated maize. Agron. J. 102, 1682. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.2134/agronj2010.0282.
Yagüe, M.R., Quílez, D., 2015. Pig slurry residual effects on maize yields and nitrate
leaching: a study in lysimeters. Agron. J. 107, 278. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/
agronj14.0171.
Yagi, K., Tsuruta, H., Minami, K., 1997. Possible options for mitigating methane
emission from rice cultivation. Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst. 49, 213–220. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1009743909716.
Zavattaro, L., Monaco, S., Sacco, D., Grignani, C., 2012. Options to reduce N loss from
maize in intensive cropping systems in Northern Italy. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
147, 24–35.
>>>>>>> 2722771823fc534d44839a79e520392765d8cbd3
24 A. Sanz-Cobena et al. / Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 238 (2017) 5–24