MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 66, No. 6, June 2020, pp. 2796–2799
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mnsc ISSN 0025-1909 (print), ISSN 1526-5501 (online)
Aging Population, Retirement, and Risk Taking: Reply
Haim Levya
a School of Business, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91905, Israel
Contact: mshlevy@huji.ac.il, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8623-3507 (HL)
Received: June 25, 2018
Revised: August 26, 2019; November 26, 2018
Accepted: September 6, 2019
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
May 6, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3518
Copyright: © 2020 INFORMS
Abstract. In theorem 1 given in my paper, “Aging Population, Retirement, and Risk
Taking” [Levy H (2016a) Aging population, retirement, and risk taking. Management Sci.
62(5):1415–1430.], there is indeed a technical error. Yet, adding one condition to the
theorem (which can be added in two alternate ways) is sufficient to ensure the dominance
of stocks over bonds in the very long run. For the commonly employed preferences, the
empirical evidence conforms with the claim given in my original theorem 1, asserting that
the portfolio with the higher geometric mean (stocks) dominates the other portfolio under
consideration (bonds) as the investment horizon increases indefinitely. Thus, as advocated
in my paper, stocks dominate bonds for investors with typical preferences who save
for retirement.
History: Accepted by Karl Deither, finance.
Keywords: asymptotic stochastic dominance • investment horizon • stocks for the long run
1. Introduction
Iwould like to thank Rachel J. Huang, Larry Y. Tzeng,
Jr-Yan Wang, and Lin Zhao, as well as Moshe Levy
for correcting a technical error in my paper (see Levy
2016a), and particularly for extending the results of
my paper in several interesting directions.1 Their
comments also shedmore light on the important longstanding
debate of whether stocks (which have a higher
geometric mean than bonds) dominate bonds in the
very long run, and hence whether the well-known
assertion of “stocks for the long run” is valid. I divide
my reply to both comments into two categories: the
theoretical analysis and the empirical evidence.
2. The Theoretical Analysis
First, in my paper Levy (2016a), there is indeed a
technical error with an implication to theorem 1. Two
cumulative normal distributions, F and G (which
in the specific case analyzed in my paper are the
distributions of log-returns), have at most one intersection
point given by
x0  μF σG − μGσF
( )
(σG − σF) , (1)
where μ and σ stand for the mean and standard deviation
of these two distributions, respectively. Assuming
independence over time and a T-period investment
horizon, the intersection point of the two
distributions of the log-terminal wealth is given by
x0  T μF σG − μGσF
( )
(σG − σF) . (2)
In mypaper (Levy 2016a), Iwrote that the intersection
point between two normal distributions is given by
z0  μF
− μG
( )
(σG − σF) for T  1, (3)
and that for T > 1, it is given by
z0 
̅̅
T
√ μF
− μG
( )
(σG − σF) (4)
(see equation (3) in Levy 2016a).
Note that both Equations (1) and (3) are correct.
However, Equation (3) gives the intersection point in
terms of the standardized normal distribution z0 and
Equation (1) gives the intersection point in terms of
the nonstandardized normal distribution x0.2 For the
dominance analysis the intersection point given by x0 is
the relevant one, but I mistakenly used z0. Unfortunately,
this scribal error occurred and it has an implication
to the conditions for dominance given in
Theorem 1, which I correct in this reply. Let me first
state the original Theorem 1 as a reference point and
then state, in two alternate ways (corresponding to
the comments from Huang et al. 2019 and Levy 2019),
the additional conditions required to guarantee the
dominance of F over G. Note first that in the analysis
below we rely on the following well-known relations:
if log(x) is normally distributed, then the variable x
is log-normally distributed and when log(x)→+∞,
x→+∞, and when log(x)→−∞, x→0.
Theorem 1. Assume an investment horizon of T periods
and that WT(F) and WT (G) are log-normal distributions.
2796
Assume that μF>μG; namely, F has a higher geometric
mean than G. Then, for T→∞, F (with the larger geometric
mean) dominates G by almost first-degree stochastic dominance
(AFSD) if and only if μF >μG and σF ≥σG, provided
that the marginal utility is bounded (see Levy 2016a).
Note that the parameters given in Theorem 1 correspond
to log-returns. To avoid confusion in the rest of
my reply, I denote by z0 the intersection point of the
standardized normal distributions, by x0 the intersection
point of the two corresponding nonstandardized
normal distributions (see endnote 2), and by L0
the intersection point of the corresponding two lognormal
distributions.
As explainedabove,Equation(2) (and not Equation (4))
is the relevant one for determining the dominance
relation, and therefore Theorem1 should be modified.
One way to modify Theorem 1, as emerges indirectly
from the comment of Huang et al. (2019), is to add
to Theorem 1 the condition μF/σF >μG/σG and “iff”
should be replaced by “if.” With the additional requirement
that μF/σF >μG/σG, it is easy to see that
T→∞ implies that x0→ −∞ for the normal distributions,
and therefore L0→0 for the corresponding lognormal
distributions. Thus, in the whole range F (with
the higher geometric mean) is located below G, and
hence the dominance of F over G in the long run
(AFSD) is obtained.
Huang et al. (2019) correctly claim that theoretically
we may have dominance also in the case where σF < σG,
and hence the condition σF ≥ σG is not a necessary
condition for dominance. Therefore, in the modified
theorem given below, I replaced “iff” by “if.” While in
a comparison of any two prospects the relation σF < σG
is generally possible, it is irrelevant to my paper, as
I analyze whether stocks dominate bonds for the long
run, and with empirical data we have σF > σG (see the
empirical data given below). Moreover, the problem
with this modification is that when stocks and bonds
are compared, generally the condition μF/σF >μG/σG
does not conform with empirical data. Therefore, we
need to rely on the dominance suggestion given in
the comment of Levy (2019), who allows also the
case μF/σF <μG/σG that conforms to the empirical
evidence. Let us elaborate. First, M. Levy’s comment
also corrects the intersection point formula that I
employed in my paper and shows that as T→∞, the
intersection point of the two log-normal distributions
either approaches 0 or +∞. M. Levy shows that my
original claim of the superiority of the portfolio with
the higher geometric mean remains intact if one also
adds a lower bound on the marginal utility, namely,
U ≥MLB, where MLB stands for the bound suggested
by M. Levy. Combining the suggestions given in the
two comments, I revise Theorem 1 by adding the lower
bound suggested by M. Levy as follows.
Revised Theorem 1. Assume an investment horizon of
T periods and that WT(F) and WT (G) are log-normal distributions
where F and G stand for the distribution of stocks
and bonds, respectively. Assume that σF > σG and that the
marginal utility is bounded from above (as suggested in Levy
2016a) and also from below (as suggested by Levy 2019).
Then, μF >μG (namely, F has a higher geometric mean
than G) is a sufficient condition for dominance of F over G
by AFSD.
Proof. The correct intersection point of the two normal
distributions can be rewritten as
x0 
(
μF
σF
− μG
σG
)/(
1
σF
− 1
σG
)
≡ A/B.
For T > 1, it is given by Tx0 (see equations (1) and (2) in
Levy 2019). As we assume that σF(stocks) > σG(bonds),
the denominator term B is negative. There are two
extreme possible locations of the intersection point and
we consider below each possible location separately.
1. If A is positive, thenwe have that as T→∞, L0→0
and F dominates G, as claimed in my original
Theorem 1.
2. If A is negative, then when T→∞, we have that
L0→∞ and we need to add Levy’s (2019) lower
bound on the marginal utility to guarantee dominance
of F over G (the proof of this case is given in
Levy 2019).
Thus, one can modify my original Theorem 1 in
two alternate directions to maintain its result of the
dominance of stocks over bonds in the very long run:
(a) adding a lower-bound constraint on the marginal
utility (as suggested by M. Levy), or (b) adding
to the original Theorem 1 the condition μF/σF >μG/σG.
However, as we see below, the condition μF/σF>
μG/σG does not hold empirically. Therefore, we focus
on the suggestion ofM. Levy to add a lower bound on
the marginal utility. Note that, as the conditions for
dominance are sufficient and not necessary, it even
strengthens the assertion “stocks for the long run,” as
stocks may dominate bonds even in cases where one
of the conditions does not hold, let alone when the
conditions hold.
3. The Empirical Evidence
The interesting question is whether the added conditions
needed to guarantee dominance of F over G
have empirical support.
Table 1 provides the empirical parameters of logreturns
for stocks, bonds, and treasury bills.
As can be seen from this table, the mean return of
stocks is much larger than the corresponding means
of bonds and treasury bills, respectively. But what is
more relevant to the issue analyzed inmy paper is that
Levy: Aging Population and Risk Taking
Management Science, 2020, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2796–2799, © 2020 INFORMS 2797
the standard deviation for stocks is 0.195, much larger
than the corresponding figure for bonds (0.075). Therefore,
the case σF <σG is practically irrelevant to the
issue of whether stocks dominate bonds in the long
run. Finally, we have, empirically, that μF/σF<μG/σG
(see Table 1); therefore, the additional condition
μF/σF> μG/σG , although theoretically possible, has
no empirical support.
In sum, while with the empirical data we have
σF >σG and the case σF < σG is empirically irrelevant,
theoretically, the additional required condition for the
sufficiency side of Theorem 1 as suggested by Huang
et al. (2019) is needed. In addition, the condition
μF/σF > μG/σG does not hold empirically when bonds
and stocks are compared. Therefore, we focus below
on the more relevant condition suggested by Levy
(2019) for the dominance of stocks over bonds in the
case where μF/σF < μG/σG, a case which has strong
empirical support (see Table 1).
We turn to the empirical implications of the theoretical
criticisms of Levy (2019). First, note that it is
assumed that μF >μG and σF > σG, which conform
with the empirical data where stocks and bonds are
considered. Because empirically we find that also
μF/σF< μG/σG (see Table 1), the empirically relevant
intersection point is given by L0→∞. Therefore,
we need to address the comment and approach of
Levy (2019). He correctly claims that in this case one
needs to impose a lower bound on themarginal utility
to guarantee dominance of stocks over bonds in the
very long run. The empirical question is wheth-er the
needed empirical lower bound holds for all (or for
most) economically relevant utility functions. Levy
(2019) investigates a few functions attemp-ting to
show that the lower bound does not hold, hence refuting
the assertion that stocks dominate bonds in the
long run. Reading carefully his comment, it seems that
Levy (2019) struggles to find some specific preferences
for which the required lower bound does not
hold and bonds provide a higher expected utility than
stocks. Indeed, he shows empirically that for exponential
preference U(x)  −e−4x and for the utility
function U(x)  U(x)  (x + A)1−α/(1 − α) with α  10
the required condition on the marginal utility does not
hold, and also that bonds are better than stocks for the
long run. However, for a more reasonable risk-aversion
parameter α  0.5 or even α ≤ 2, stocks provide a
higher expected utility than bonds in the long run,
which conforms with the claim in Theorem 1.
My response to these results is that they rather
support my argument of “stocks (with the higher
geometric mean) for the long run.” First, the exponential
utility function with the relevant parameters
has the deficiency of the “blank check” paradox (see
Markowitz et al. 1994, p. 89). In their words: “An
immediate consequence is this: If the investor has RRA ≥1,
as many believe is true and/or desirable, and Rc > ln2, as do
most of our respondents, then the investor cannot have an
exponential utility function.”
By the same token, using the generalized myopic
utility function with α  10 (for which the required
lower-bound condition does not hold and bonds are
preferred over stocks) is irrelevant, as the relative
risk-aversion parameter α is typically estimated to be
at most 2, and most researches claim that it is even
smaller than 1 (see Mehra and Prescott 1985 and
references within). Thus, it seems to be very hard, if
not impossible, to find nonpathological utility functions
with economically relevant parameters where
the lower bound suggested by Levy (2019) on the
marginal utility function is not met and bonds are
preferred to stocks. Therefore, it seems that, for virtually
all commonly employed utility functions, we
have a dominance of stocks over bonds for the long
run, as I claimed in my original paper.
Levy (2019) derives a closed-form solution for the
portfolio-choice problem of constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) investors under the assumption
of log-normal return distributions. He finds that
with the empirical parameters, stocks are preferred
to bonds for all CRRA investorswith a relative riskaversion
coefficient smaller than 3.9. This, once
again, supportsmyclaim of the dominance of stocks over
bonds, as most estimates of the risk-aversion parameter
available in the literature, as mentioned above, indicate
that the risk-aversion parameter is even smaller than 2.
To sum up, in general, as T→∞, the intersection
point of the two log-normal distributions is either
approaching zero or infinity. If it approaches zero,
then stocks dominate bonds, as advocated in my
paper. If it approaches infinity, then we need to add
also a lower bound on the marginal utility to guarantee
that stocks dominate bonds in the long run.
Alternatively, one can also add the condition μF/σF>
μG/σG to make my Theorem 1 sufficient (but not
necessary) without the need to add M. Levy’s lower
bound. While this path may be useful in some cases,
in comparing stocks to bonds for the long run, this
approach is irrelevant, as, empirically, μF/σF <μG/σG.
Thus, to guarantee a dominance of stocks over bonds
Table 1. The Mean and Standard Deviation of log-Returns
Treasury bills Corporate bonds Stocks (S&P 500)
μ 0.034 0.060 0.097
σ 0.029 0.075 0.195
μ/σ 1.172 0.800 0.497
Source. Levy 2016b, p. 383.
Note. The calculations are based on annual return for the period
1926–2013.
Levy: Aging Population and Risk Taking
2798 Management Science, 2020, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2796–2799, © 2020 INFORMS
in the long run, we need the lower bound on the
marginal utility as suggested by Levy (2019).
Empirically, stocks have a higher geometric mean
return (and obviously also a higher arithmetic mean
return), a higher variance, and a smaller μ/σ than the
corresponding parameters of bonds. Therefore, one
needs a utility function with a relatively large riskaversion
parameter to reveal a preference for bonds.
Indeed, there is empirically a preference for bonds
with exponential preferences with an absolute riskaversion
parameter greater than 4, or myopic utility
functions with a relative risk-aversion parameter
greater than 10. These two cases are not accepted by
virtually all economists, as the risk-aversion parameter
is much smaller; hence, with the relevant parameters,
stocks are preferred to bonds.
Acknowledgments
I amgrateful to the departmental editor, Karl Diether, and the
anonymous referee for their helpful suggestions.
Endnotes
1 In two recent papers on this topic, Huang et al. (2020b) and Levy
(2019) suggest additional interesting extensions. M. Levy shows in
proposition 1 of his paper that if the distributions of returns of
portfolios are log-normal, then the CRRA investor will choose the
portfolio with the highest value of μ + σ(1 − α)/2, where (1 − α)
denotes the relative risk-aversion index of the CRRA investor.
Huang et al. (2019b) extend the analysis regarding this topic in a
different direction: first they define a new concept called operational
asymptotic stochastic dominance and then for log-normal distributions,
in their theorem 3, they provide an “if and only if” condition for
operational AFSD of one distribution over the other.
2 Equation (3) provides the intersection point of two cumulative
normal distributions in terms of the standardized normal variable z.
However, as we are interested in the intersection point in terms of the
normal nonstandardized variable, x0 ,we have for T  1 the following
relation: z0  (μF
− μG
)
(σG −σF)→x0  (μFσG − μGσF)
σG − σF , which clarifies the relation
between Equations (1) and (3). Yet, only Equation (1) is relevant for
the analysis given in my original paper.
References
Huang RJ, Tzeng LY, Wang JY, Zhao L (2019) Comment on “Aging
population, retirement, and risk taking.” Management Sci,
ePub ahead of print August 29, https://doi.org/10.1287/
mnsc.2018.3052.
Huang RJ, Tzeng LY, Wang JY, Zhao L (2020) Operational asymptotic
stochastic dominance. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 280(1):312–322.
Levy H (2016a) Aging population, retirement, and risk taking. Management
Sci. 62(5):1415–1430.
Levy H (2016b) Stochastic Dominance: Investment Decision Making
Under Uncertainty, 3rd ed. (Springer, New York).
Levy M (2019) Stocks for the long-run and constant relative risk
aversion preferences. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 277(3):1163–1168.
Markowitz HM, Reid DW, Tew BV (1994) The value of a blank check.
J. Portfolio Management 20(4):82–91.
Mehra R, Prescott EC (1985) The equity premium: A puzzle.
J. Monetary Econom. 15(2):145–161.
Levy: Aging Population and Risk Taking
Management Science, 2020, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2796–2799, © 2020 INFORMS 2799
Copyright 2020, by INFORMS, all rights reserved. Copyright of Management Science is the
property of INFORMS: Institute for Operations Research and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.