sustainability
Review
Sustainability Challenge of Eastern Europe—Historical Legacy,
Belt and Road Initiative, Population Aging and Migration
Mihajlo Jakovljevic 1,2,* , Arcadio A. Cerda 3, Yansui Liu 4, Leidy García 3, Yuriy Timofeyev 5 , Kristijan Krstic 6
and John Fontanesi 7
 
 
Citation: Jakovljevic, M.;
Cerda, A.A.; Liu, Y.; García, L.;
Timofeyev, Y.; Krstic, K.; Fontanesi, J.
Sustainability Challenge of Eastern
Europe—Historical Legacy, Belt and
Road Initiative, Population Aging
and Migration. Sustainability 2021, 13,
11038. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su131911038
Academic Editor: Andreas Ihle
Received: 9 August 2021
Accepted: 27 September 2021
Published: 5 October 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Institute of Comparative Economic Studies, Hosei University Faculty of Economics, Tokyo 102-8160, Japan
2 Department Global Health Economics & Policy, University of Kragujevac, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia
3 Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Talca, Talca 3460000, Chile; acerda@utalca.cl (A.A.C.);
leidyyomary@gmail.com (L.G.)
4 Institute of Geographic Science and Natural Resource Research (IGSNRR), Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100049, China; liuys@igsnrr.ac.cn
5 Department of Strategic and International Management, National Research University Higher School of
Economics, 119049 Moscow, Russia; y.timofeyev@hse.ru
6 Infectious Diseases Clinic, University Clinical Center Kragujevac, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia;
dr.krstic.kristijan@gmail.com
7 Center for Management Science in Health, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0021, USA;
jfontanesi@ucsd.edu
* Correspondence: sidartagothama@gmail.com or jakovljevic.mihajlo.46@hosei.ac.jp
Abstract: The historical legacy of Eastern European and the Balkans’ health systems was mutually
interdependent and shaped by local socioeconomic circumstances. Three distinctive systems of risk
sharing and health financing developed since the late XIX century were the Bismarck, Beveridge, and
Semashko systems. Modern day healthcare systems in these countries are challenged by population
aging, accelerated innovation in medical technology, growing purchasing power and rising demand
for healthcare services. Supply-side changes contribute to demand-side efficiency bottlenecks in
financing, driving up the costs of the already expensive medical care. All of the nations have a large
share of citizens experiencing difficulty with affordability and access to medical care, particularly in
rural and remote areas. Network of health technology assessment agencies have mushroomed over
the past three decades. Principles of health economics theory and cost-effective resource allocation
are slowly gaining ground in governing authorities’ mindset and decision-making processes. For
many years to come, pharmaceuticals and medical services will remain dependent on out-of-pocket
spending. Currently, accelerating and spreading 4.0 Industrial Revolution, together with the Belt
and Road Initiative, are likely to substantially impact the further economic development of this
vast region. Post-pandemic “green” recovery strategies adopted by many of the Eastern European
governments shall also make this transition toward sustainable development more difficult and
challenging, given the large dependency of all these economies on traditional carbon fuels.
Keywords: Eastern Europe; Balkans; healthcare; sustainability; history; financing; population aging;
migration; Belt and Road Initiative; sustainable millennium development goals
1. Introduction
This contribution represents a critical literature review. It was conducted in order to
synthesize a large body of scholarly literature. Its purpose was to explain the historical
background and future challenges of sustainable healthcare in Eastern European and
Balkan countries. We adopted the exceptionally lengthy historical horizon of several
centuries. In addition, authors attempted to explain core events in a broad outreach of
national jurisdictions spanning across almost half of 53 contemporary European WHO
Region countries. Thus, authors were forced to prioritize and shortlist a large amount of
literature evidence and focus on those most important to understand a chain of events
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131911038 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 2 of 18
leading to the establishment of modern-day health systems in these countries. Most of
the selected evidence base has been published in high impact journals and present the
most-cited sources in their respective areas. In order to grasp a structure of analytical
work and evidence synthesis in this review, we have provided a table shortlisting core
bibliographic information on studies, reports and archives used to prepare this document.
Sustainability of the national health system was the core research question explored in
this review. The broadest consensus defines sustainability as “the capacity to endure in a
relatively ongoing way across various domains of life”. It may be applicable to an array of
hierarchically organized systems ranging from Earth ecosphere to human societies. Over
the recent few decades, it has become a matter of public attention due to the fact that previous
industrial revolutions have led to widespread environmental pollution worldwide and
the first-ever massive extinction of biological species caused by mankind. Contemporary
policies adopted by the majority of national governments in the Kyoto Protocol and Paris
Climate Agreement emphasize commitments to sustainable economic development. They
also provide targets and unique measurements to assess the achievement of such outcomes.
In particular, those related to healthcare and other dimensions of social welfare are explained
in the UN-adopted 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 2030 Agenda. In
light of all these global developments, we have attempted to observe and analyze unique
regional features of Eastern European and Balkan health systems. Our goal was to assess
their abilities to progress alongside SDGs and identify bottleneck weaknesses that may
need nation-tailored reform policies.
Particular emphasis on the Eastern European region was placed in this article due
to the fact it is exposed to significantly higher ethno-religious diversity in comparison
to Western, Southern and Northern Europe. This landscape has evolved from the fact
this region was a cultural melting pot for centuries. Today, the challenge of sustainability
remains a high stake and unique common challenge to all of these various national health
systems. The authors’ goal was to enlighten this complex issue from the perspectives of
local economies and provide plausible hints to overcome these obstacles. We believe this
review may fill a certain knowledge gap in the seminal literature.
2. Historical Circumstances Preceding the Establishment of Eastern European
Health Systems
Eastern Europe and the Balkans, or Helm peninsula as it was named in antiquity,
represent a huge geographic space consisting of vast Eastern European plains and massive
mountain chains, such as the Carpathian Mountains, the Alps and the Dinaric Alps. In socioeconomical
terms, several distinctive cultural patterns traditionally meet here. Throughout
centuries, ethno-religious borderlines between Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodox
Christianity, and Sunni Islam shaped the entire region as the cultural melting pot [1]. The
Cold War [2] and subsequent accelerated Globalization Era played a prominent role [3] in
the evolution of modern socioeconomic perspective and the health systems of these nations.
These factors have shaped the geopolitical setting in which these countries operate at the
dawn of the third decade of the XXI century [4]. The region now consists of the European
Union’s Eastern European country members, small Balkan nation states, and current non-
EU members that emerged as a result of Yugoslavia’s dissolution. To the east lies the vast
Eurasian Union, consisting of the Russian Federation and its culturally syncretic former
USSR republics [5]. Although geographically situated at the southernmost tip of Balkan
peninsula, Greece is geopolitically considered to be outside of this region. A total of thirteen
years before the official establishment of the European Union in Maastricht in 1992, the
Treaty of Accession was signed in 1979 between the European Economic Community and
Greece. Turkey belongs to the region only partially with its narrow coastal belt of Istanbul’s
European side, while the Balkans still host centuries- old Ottoman cultural legacy.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 3 of 18
Although regional diversity is huge, the national health systems, mostly throughout
the XIXth and XXth centuries, share many similar features and challenges. In the Russian
Empire, the establishment of national health care occurred earlier, during the XVIIIth
century, with the introduction of medicine studies at the Imperial Moscow University
(Èìïåðaòoðñêèé Ìoñêoâñêèé Óíèâåðñèòåò) in 1755 and a network of public hospitals and
educational institutes in 1758 [6]. The Ottoman Empire had its health system conceived
with the establishment of The Imperial Military School of Medicine (Mekteb-I Tıbbiye-I
¸Sahane) in 1827, on orders by Sultan Mahmud II [7]. The Austro-Hungarian Empire led
by the House of Habzburg was a long lasting statehood that left profound imprints in
many Eastern European and Balkan cultures. In the area of its geopolitical outreach, the
Deutsch language was effectively Lingua Franca of a large part of Eastern Europe. Its
oldest medical establishments date back to 1784 when Emperor Joseph II established the
first state-run general hospital in continental Europe, the Algemeines Krankenhaus (the
General Hospital) [8]. Slightly earlier, in the mid-1740s, began a set of reforms at Vienna
Medical School aimed at closing the existing gap in the medical technology frontier after
theWestern European colonial powerhouses [9].
The milestone event for the entire region was the emergence of three contemporary
systems of risk sharing. These early health and social insurance and tax collection strategies
were created in order to secure financing of a brand-new invention of the late XIXth century,
i.e., the hierarchical national health system. They are mostly known as the German Bismarck
system established in 1884, British Beveridge system established in 1948, and Soviet-Russian
Semashko system grounded in the reforms of 1921 and officially consecrated in the early
1930s. Otto von Bismarck, the Chancellor of the German Empire, introduced the “Social
Health Insurance Model”. It pioneered the first large-scale compulsory insurance coverage
to establish universal healthcare in Germany, and later, in large part to Europe [10]. The
Bismarckian system was rooted in the Prussian Industrial Revolution, involving a tripartite
relationship between trade unions, employers, and the state. The situation was different in
the largely agrarian Balkans. This is one of the reasons why Greece, sharing the Balkan
agrarian traditions, failed to develop comprehensive health insurance. Its core limitation
was the fact that it covered only a narrow range of industrial workers families [11], which
represented a minority in an agricultural German society [12,13].
SirWilliam Beveridge, a British economist has created grounds for the creation of Great
Britain’s National Health Services (NHS) in 1948 [14]. It introduced effective universal
health insurance coverage, while removing the responsibility from citizens to co-fund
medical care via out-of-pocket spending [15]. Its core weaknesses are long-term shortages
of physicians and nursing staff [16]. The tendency to over-utilize the system benefits of
affordable medical care generates long wait times for patients, particularly in expensive
and complex medical procedures [17]. This system still delivers a strong degree of social
protection in access to outpatient, hospital medical care and pharmaceuticals for the large
layers of lower- and middle-income citizens [18].
Regardless of negative contemporary perceptions of that era, the Soviet Union’s First
People’s Commissar of Health (1918–1930) Nikolai Alexandrovich Semashko (1874–1949)
created a unique system well ahead of its time [19]. It pioneered universal health insurance
coverage in a socialist state, which guaranteed full free-of-charge access to the existing
medical technologies to the entire population [20]. Ideals of social justice and equality
played a pivotal role in the social theory of Marxism. Universal health insurance coverage
was delivered and funded by a state-owned and centrally controlled economy. Historically,
this was the first case of universal health coverage (UHC) delivered in a large nation
ravaged by WWI and the Civil War [21]. None of the hierarchical traditional European
societies guaranteed anything comparable to their citizens back in the 1920s and 1930s.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 4 of 18
Eventually, Semashko’s theory and practice spread throughout most of Eastern Europe
[22] and the Balkans, while taking roots in Central Asia in earlier decades as part
of Soviet driven medical reform [23]. Probably, Eastern Germany is the most generous
example of communism-delivered social and medical protection among theWarsaw Pact
countries during the Cold War. The socialist state in DDR sponsored parenthood and early
childhood care to such an extent that a young couple could have raised and educated up to
three children at the cost of less than one [24]. After the Perestroika and the dissolution of
the USSR, many of Eastern European nations embarked on thorough and often difficult
sets of health care reforms [25]. Their goal was to reshape Semashko’s legacy of health
care toward diverse forms of mixed-Bismarckian or Beveridge models [26]. The countries
remaining within the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and later Eurasian Union
led by the Russian Federation also adopted a set of socioeconomic reforms to increase the
efficiency of collecting revenue flows and finance medical care delivery [27]. Currently,
most of the eastern EU member countries have adopted Bismarck heritage to a diverse
extent [28]. The Eurasian Union and CIS nations remain more loyal to a post-Semashko
healthcare system [29], with a strong emphasis on state patronage over social justice and
delivery of equitable and affordable medical services and pharmaceuticals [30]. Post-
Yugoslav republics share mixed-Bismarck legacies with the strong presence of Semashko
model features inherited from the long decades of socialism [31].
This paper presents a literature review that aims to provide an unbiased critical
analysis of existing research on sustainability-related challenge faced by Eastern European
and Balkan health systems. We focused on the studies, which were published during the
last two decades in the major scholarly peer-reviewed journals in the field of public health,
health economics, demography, and history of medicine.
3. Influence of the Belt and Road Initiative
Chinese traditional culture created the ancient Silk Road as the set of major continental
and sea routes. Via these routes, ancient trade was occurring between capitals of antiquity,
such as Beijing and Rome and across Judeo-Christian, Muslim, Buddhist and Confucian
cultures. This pattern of international trade continued across all three continents of the
Old World almost continuously in peace and in war for almost two millennia [32], until
the imposed imperial taxes of the Ottoman Empire after the Fall of Constantinople and the
Byzantine Empire under Turks in 1453 AD. These taxes effectively abolishedmost of Silk Road
trade since these became unaffordable for the merchants of medieval European monarchies
and the Republic of Venice. This change in global economic history is believed to have directly
led to the Age of Discovery of new naval trade routes and the early Colonial Age [33]. The
pioneering European trade colonies in close proximity to China and Japan were established in
Macau and Dejima islands by the Portuguese and Dutch sailors andmerchants.
The mostly downward cycle of weakening civilizations of India and China occurred
during the XVIII and XIX century. It resulted in the redistribution of global wealth from
the Orient toward Western Europe and its Colonial descendant cultures, essentially unwitnessed
in human history as documented by Agnus Madison Project findings [34]. The
People’s Republic of China re-established itself among the circle of global powerhouses
mostly during the late ColdWar era and over the past four decades of continuous strong
real economy growth [35]. Since the Deng Xiaoping economy reforms adoption in 1974–
1978 horizon, Chinese real gross domestic product growth (GDP) remains unparalleled [36].
It continues to be the leading engine within the circle of rapidly developing BRICS (grouping
acronym which refers to the five emerging economies: Brazil, Russia, India, China, and
South Africa) and Next Eleven Emerging Markets. This trend, according to forecasts, is
likely to remain unchallenged at least until 2025–2030 [37]. Accompanied with the inner
transformation ofWestern post-industrial societies into service-driven economies, China
has cemented its global leadership in manufacturing export-based industries. Chinese
multinationals now hold the majority of innovative patents designated for the 5G mobile
network technologies [38]. Due to Chinese breakthroughs in ultra-speed railway tracks
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 5 of 18
build-up and manufacturing of high-speed trains, these are getting approvals in tender
bidding procurements among the richest OECD markets [39]. Among other large emerging
economies, similar success stories in terms of cutting-edge technology advances are India’s
leadership in generic pharmaceutical industry and its undisputed central place as the global
hub for IT software industry. Convenient further examples are Russian breakthroughs
in cosmic industry [40,41], space [42] and military technologies and her prominence in
nuclear power plants architecture [43]. This is coupled with Brazilian advantages in the
supply of raw materials and South Africa’s rich reserves of rare earth minerals, essential
for electronics and cosmic technologies [44]. Therefore, it appears to be many mutually
useful interlinkages among the BRICS countries’ economies.
From this geo-economic landscape came the President Xi’s 2013 Kazakhstan and
Indonesia announcement of the beginning of the One Belt One Road (OBOR) initiative,
popularly portrayed in media as the New Silk Road [45]. It has been explored widely in
scholarly literature from the viewpoints of financial economics, socio-cultural developments
it may trigger and its consequences in the international politics. There is a vast
diversity of perspectives on issues related to the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). What we
can claim for certain, based in evidence, is that it appears to be the largest infrastructural
project in the history of mankind [46]. The proposed network of roads, fast railway networks,
seaports, transportation hubs for ocean ships, harbor architectural commitments,
and ultimately, expansion of current and new airport terminals, should spread across
Asia, Europe, Africa and Latin America [47]. As of March 2020, official memorandums of
understanding to become a part of Belt and Road Initiative with China have been signed
by governments of a total of 138 countries [48]. The vast majority of countries according
to the World Bank, represent low- and middle-income economies and former members of
Non-Aligned Movement during the ColdWar Era [49]. However, a number of high-income
OECD countries with a long history of free market economies, such as Italy, Austria, Portugal,
Greece in Europe, rich Arabian Gulf GCC countries, Chile and Panama and all of
Eastern EU are participating (18 EU members countries in total) [50,51].
How does the BRI Initiative translate to the issues of sustainability of the national
health systems across its many pathways? The United Nations Development Policy and
Analysis Division (DPAD) gave their own designation after careful consideration. UN
DESA’s claims that: “The official document which defined the vision and action of the “Belt and
Road” affirms that the initiative is in line with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. The
essential spirit of the Belt and Road to promote win-win cooperation, common development and
prosperity, peace and cooperation, openness and inclusiveness, and mutual understanding and trust,
conforms to the values of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” [52].
Typical cases on how BRI can be interpreted is “17 + 1 format” [53], joining China with
the total of 17 Eastern European countries [54], excluding Russia. Most of these nations,
although EU members being mostly designated as high-economies, are suffering from a
long-term underinvestment into their national health care establishments. This issue further
expands from hospital infrastructure toward chronic deficits in physicians and nursing
staff density, pharmaceuticals supply shortages and generally questionable affordability
of innovative medical technologies to the ordinary citizens. Being largely funded as an
out-of-pocket spending with moderate public reimbursement participation, many hightech
treatment strategies, such as radiation oncology, implantation surgery or monoclonal
antibodies to treat cancer [55] and autoimmune disease remain well above willingness to
pay a threshold in these countries [56]. These are among the reasons why BRI-associated
financial instruments are seriously considered as a source for balancing of budgetary needs
in “Visegrad Group” countries and Poland and Hungary in particular. There is also a degree
of criticism in cases where these funding instruments have proven to lead small countries
of the Eurozone into a default risk, such as the Montenegro case [57]. Yet, in the majority of
cases, both within the EU and among its Balkan candidate countries and Turkey, enthusiasm
for the BRI project remains high [58]. Outside the EU, such perceptions by the regional
ruling elites were additionally fueled by the insufficiencies exposed during the coronavirus
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 6 of 18
pandemic. This refers to the simple fact that countries alongside BRI major routes were
receiving earlier, more massive supplies of COVID-19 vaccines, devices intended for
respiratory support and other intensive care unit equipment in far bigger quantities and in
far more timely deliveries in comparison to their far richer counterparts among EU15. These
issues, although hardly likely to affect any of the long-term weaknesses of these national
health systems, changed the public perception in favor of BRI [59]. On the other side of
the equation, many of these countries remain way too small to remain attractive for direct
foreign investment despite the generous tax policies. Over the past decades, due to the
previous large global recession caused by the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in 2007/2008,
Western-born development assistance for health (DAH) was shrinking for nations outside
the EU for a long time. Thus, the obvious hunger for development opportunity triggers
the quest for an alternative source of revenue streams. Chinese investment not only into
transport and trade infrastructural capacities but also mining industry, energetics and
factories in the Balkans, Russia and Central Asian continues to be substantial. It remains
an important source of education and employment opportunities and a driving force
behind the national prosperity of many smaller BRI nations. Up to 70 countries lie directly
on the main trade routes and transportation hubs, whose building and utilization have
already occurred since the late 2010s. Nations such as Turkey and Greece anticipated
and are already harvesting a substantial share of their governments’ revenue streams and
budgetary incomes from the international trade taxes of these routes. A plausible room of
opportunity to increase social welfare is to re-invest these resources back into the struggle
against poverty. It remains at high stake in most BRI countries including Eastern Europe
and the Balkans. A typical model of an effective struggle to defeat poverty (Goal 17 of
SDGs) comes to us from China itself. WHO has designated Chinese policies as the classical
case of an overachiever in this area, lifting from proximity to poverty line for almost 800
million of its citizens [60]. In the stage of targeted poverty alleviation during 2013–2020,
ensuring poor people have access to basic medical care was one of the three indispensable
guarantees [61]. To achieve this end, China has established the world’s largest basic medical
security network through quotas and full funding, which refers to a triple security system,
including basic medical insurance, serious illness insurance and medical assistance.
Additionally, an attractive point of consideration is the introduction of the concept
of “Health Silk Road” [62–64], which combines the health and sustainable development
together to improve the global public health governance system. International cooperation
in the health sector has been a firm component of China’s BRI [65,66]. This concept was
firstly proposed in 2016 to deepen medical and health cooperation, and strengthen mutually
beneficial cooperation in infectious disease notification, disease prevention and control,
medical rescue and traditional medicine. Before the outbreak of COVID-19, the construction
of the “Health Silk Road” relied on the development of China’s domestic medical system,
successful experience in fighting against infectious diseases, and the long history of foreign
medical aid. Its highlights include the construction of hospitals and health infrastructure,
the dispatch and technical training of medical teams, and the tripartite cooperation with
international health organizations such as WHO. Then, it has been accelerated by the
global outbreak of COVID-19. In addition to sending medical resources, medical experts
and timely assistance, China currently provides COVID-19 vaccines to all over the world
in the form of “public goods”. In the face of such global challenges as public health
and safety, only all countries work together to prevent and control the epidemic can we
build a strong defense line. This epidemic also exposed the weakness of global public
health governance. Jointly building the “Health Silk Road” is conductive to promoting
international cooperation in the field of health and accelerating the construction of a global
community of a shared destiny.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 7 of 18
Aforementioned integrative Eurasian processes and build-up of trade route capacities
are closely related to the demographic dynamics of these vast entire ethnic spaces inhabited
by a myriad of ancient nations. As we shall see below, things are rapidly changing in
demographic terms alongside the continental andmaritime routes of the New Silk Road. In
order to better understand the long-termhidden population trends thatmay profoundly affect
economic sustainability of these initiatives, we will explore these issues in the next section.
4. Population Aging and Middle-Eastern Migrations to the European Continent
Population aging or “The Silver Tsunami” presents a unique and new phenomenon in
the written demographic history of mankind [67]. It consists of a set of gradual socioeconomic
changes triggered by three consecutive industrial revolutions. Its core underlying
drivers are falling female fertility, coupled with the improved early childhood survival and
extended longevity [68]. Sexual revolution and the process of emancipation of women has
effectively created financial incentives to the ladies to give less birth. This evolving process
became apparent worldwide from Latin America to East Asia in most contemporary societies
regardless of their prevailing ethno-religious, cultural pattern or way of life. Today,
population aging or the third demographic transition has spread almost universally across
the globe. The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
Division reports only 18 countries designated as “demographic outliers”, almost all of
them being located in Sudanese Africa, with the exception of Afghanistan [69].
It appears that early fertility falls were discovered two centuries ago in French demographic
archives closely following the Revolution of 1789. In most European nations, the
process had its early roots up to one century ago [70]. Yet, it became visible only in the
decades following the second world war. Eastern Europe and the Balkans had experienced
their main historical fertility falls throughout post-WorldWar II recovery and the ColdWar
era. Marxist’s policy-makers’ emphasis on social justice and equality have led to massive
education of women from all social layers including the poor. The gap between men
and women in average education and respective income levels remained for many years.
This gap was effectively closed only after 1991. Female fertility levels (average number
of children for a lifetime, per woman of a child-bearing age) continued to decrease from
historical levels prior to the FirstWorldWar of up to six or seven children per woman up to
a contemporary bottom ranging from 1.52 in Serbia (2019) up to 1.73 in Turkey (2020). The
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria and all other smaller nations followed a similar
pattern [71]. Romania is a stereotypical case of the country who was losing its youngest
labor productive population rapidly both due to aging and migration westwards inside
the EU. Thus, its population size has shrunk from a historical level of 23.21 million back
in 1990 to less than 19.3 million today. Bulgaria was following the same pattern shrinking
from 8.97 million in 1986 up to 6.9 million today [71].
A massive flux of Middle-Eastern and North-African migrations reaching its peak
in 2015, triggered by the Syrian civil war, did not change the demographic landscape of
Eastern Europe and the Balkans as much as it did in their richer Western and Northern
European counterparts. The point is in the fact that both Balkan routes of migration via
Turkey, Greece, and Serbia toward Hungary were actually transit routes [72]. Serbia has
only received one million and a half mostly ethnic Arab refugees and internally displaced
citizens and economics migrants since 2014, with almost all of them leaving away toward
the rich Protestant north of Europe. Despite receiving warm local hospitality as witnessed
by their own statements, most ofmigrants were driven by their economic uncertainties [73].
Their journal, inmost cases, ended up somewhere in the EU15 nations, typically Scandinavia
or Germany. In addition, many of the countries alongside themassive Balkan migrant route
have adopted sets of polices that effectively halted furthermigration of such scale. Although
themean age ofmigrant citizens ismuch younger that Eastern European average, and fertility
rates of their homeland societies significantly higher [74], it still did not have any substantial
consequences for the demographic structure of Poland or Hungary.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 8 of 18
How did all these profound and dynamic changes reflect the sustainability of the
existing post-Semashko and mixed Bismarck health systems of Eastern Europe? As we all
know, the Bismarck system, which is widespread outside CIS nations, relies heavily on
mandatory tax contributions for health insurance charged to employers and employees
alike. The essence of demographic aging consists of the fact that an average citizen is aged
approximately 40 or older. There used to be a strong fertility rebound phenomenon among
the post-war WWII baby boomer generations. It has created massive cohorts in the age
groups born during the late 1940s, 1950s and 1960s [75]. Yet, all of these citizens’ working
age has passed and most of them are now retired citizens. This massive pool of citizens
enjoying socially guaranteed pensions is a notable feature of each single Eastern European
and Balkan society. In addition, over the past decades, fertility rates were constantly falling.
This process was particularly worsened and accelerated since the end of Cold War and
beginning of economic hardships and poverty in the 1990s. It was associated with the
Russian Recession reaching the bottom in 1998 [76], effectively involving all of its former
Warsaw pact satellite economies (currently the Eastern EU wing) inherited from Soviet
era [77]. The process of economics recovery was rather swift and sudden since 2000. Yet
these cohorts of generations born in families with one or two children were much smaller in
size [78]. It meant that labor workforce was shrinking rapidly over decades and alongside
with it—the taxpayer body responsible for budgetary revenues to finance social and health
insurance programs. Thus, their demographic pyramids look like an old building whose
ground, weight-bearing floors consisting of working-age taxpayers are getting thinner and
upper floors of supported elderly citizens are getting ever more massive.
Particularly concerning from the health economics point of view is the so called:
“last year of life” phenomenon. It means well known fact that most citizens tend to
experience end-of-life severe morbidity involving lengthy intensive care unit admissions
and expensive medical care technologies. Usually, this consumption over the last twelve
months were proven to be equal or exceeding the lifetime medical consumption of an
individual citizen [79]. Given the growing share of elderly, budget impact of this demand
for hospital admission and complex home-based care continues to grow. Quite substantial
burden for the entire social support system is being created by the senior citizens living
alone. Due to extended longevity in Eastern Europe [33], many of them in their late 1970s
or 1980s are now suffering from either dementia or non-communicable diseases [80]. This
creates additional workload in terms of family care giving. It represents an important
bottleneck unmet need across entire region for three reasons. First is that traditionally the
network of nursing homes for elderly remains heavily underdeveloped from Baltic states
to the south of Balkans and Russia [81]. Second reason is that putting their own parents in
such a facility by their grown-up children, is still associated with heavy social stigma even
in contemporary social milieu of most of these nations [82]. Last but not least, raising fewer
children, on average less than two, simply means less hands capable of providing home
based medical care to those in need. Further exploration of these unmet social needs has led
to the conclusion that large number of those citizens providing care to their grandmothers
and grandfathers actually bears difficult double burden of raising their own children or
attending a full or part time job. This has been known to lead to the chronic exhaustion
and further deficiencies for the working age citizen wearing the double burden usually for
many years [83].
Sustainability challenge was made more complex with the liberalization of the market
and arrival of new medical technologies. The living standards of vast layers of citizens
were growing rapidly among Eastern EU and the Russian Federation alike. Yet they
had to face new relationships unknown in communism, when medical technologies were
maybe slightly lagging behind, but they were available to all the citizens irrespective
of their income and social status. Now in free market economies, there were widening
social gaps as measured in terms of Gini indices and diverse affordability thresholds for
medical care depending on household income. Probably even bigger challenge was created
with accelerated innovation in medicine. Cutting-edge technologies, such as monoclonal
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 9 of 18
antibodies—pharmaceuticals extending survival for cancer for months or even up to a few
years, were accessible in the local markets for the first time. Societal demand followed
the supply routes since people in the age of internet were well acquainted with best
possible treatments they could obtain. This has created a set of new challenges in terms
of national resource allocation prioritization, risk sharing agreements with Big Pharma
multinational manufacturers and ever-growing Eastern European out-of-pocket health
expenditure. Although many of these nations are classified as high-income developing
ones nowadays, these systemic issues do not appear to be resolved even half-way down
the road. Increasing investment into the health economics decision making capacities
and a network of Health Technology Assessment agencies in these countries has brought
some, but moderate release. A good hint to understand development perspectives of
these vast regions is to take a closer look to the real GDP growth perspectives and their
health spending dynamics during the last global macroeconomic recession 2007–2016.
These data can be correlated with compound annual market growth rates (CAGR) and
long-term investment plans being reported by the leading pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Keeping in mind demographic and real economic growth forecasts we see that Big Pharma
remains primarily interested only in the largest and most promising among the Emerging
Markets, typically the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, China) and to a lesser extent Mexico,
Indonesia, Turkey and Nigeria. Most of remaining smaller Eastern European and Balkan
countries plan to compensate their growing budgetary deficits to finance health care with
an array of strategies. These range from reliance on European Commission’s funding
streams for those within the EU. For the EU candidate countries and some of the Eastern
EU members, Chinese investment plans alongside BRI remain among the main possible
sources to compensate for existing shortages. Large ones like Russia and Turkey will remain
highly reliant on their inner economic capabilities and again Eurasian economic integration
processes. Some small economies are finding their existing strategies vie restructuring their
entire national economies toward IT sector or profitable mining industries and other rooms
of opportunity. How all of these different economic transformation pathways will evolve
during the upcoming decade yet remains to be seen.
5. Policy Recommendations and Conclusions
Contemporary Eastern European and Balkan countries face common sustainability
challenges in terms of health financing and provision. Their historical legacies in healthcare
establishments are now converging together to a surprising extent. In years ahead, accelerated
population aging and prohibitively expensive medical technologies will represent
the core challenges. Budget impact of life extending interventions in intractable diseases
such as blockbuster oncology drugs appears to cross ever-higher societal willingness to
pay thresholds.
All of the unfolding developments imply necessity for extensive health policy reform
strategies to be implemented. Typically, most of these countries have already three and
more decade of fertility raising policy debates. Yet in many of them efforts remain rather
limited. For example, value added tax evasion for baby equipment and early childhood
goods has not been adopted so far in most of Balkan parliaments. Comprehensive reforms
to combat aging and declining fertility in the long run were performed so far mostly by
France and Russia among Europe’s large nations. Eastern Europe continues to remain in
a more juvenile stage of this demographic transition in comparison to Western Europe
since the process there began much earlier in historical terms. Yet situation is more than
alarming while Turkey, Albania and Ireland were among the last European nations joining
the process and diving deep in their fertility declines. Comprehensive policy reforms would
assume unemployment insurance for pregnant and childbearing mothers with extended
time periods until return to work. Here the remnants of former socialist centrally-planned
economies of Eastern Europe and Balkans still behold some of the old benefits. Yet with
humble outcomes. Fertility declines continue and mortality seriously outpaces natality in
most of these countries outside Eurasian Union and Turkey. Their populations continue to
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 10 of 18
remain stable of gradually shrink with an average citizen age growing for decades reached
the threshold of forty in many countries. Old age dependency ratios become less promising
as well given the fact that fewer children are coupled with extended life expectancy. This
implies necessity of another set of reforms tackling the needs of ever-growing body of
retired citizens. In the most generous pension system of France an average citizen could enjoy
up to 24 years of living on social benefits. This anticipated consumption of social insurance
funds becomes a fiscal bottleneck of fiscal sustainability since the young capable workforce
continues to shrink and alongside with it the revenue streams of taxable income in all of these
societies. Already existing response, largely driven by European Commission policies and
national government policies has been deployed in terms of continued extension of retirement
age. Thus, women’s average pension age grew from 55 to 63 due to adoption of multiple
gender laws and their amendments in less than a decade.
Health financing inefficiencies become more obvious given the fact that aging society
imposes stronger demand for medical goods and services. Domestic supply by Eastern
European pharmaceutical manufacturing, used to be self-sufficient in communist era.
Currently, most of the remaining factories were purchased by foreign capital investment,
and do not satisfy the domestic needs. Medical equipment and drugs imports continue
to diversify, and the drug bill rises alongside with these imports. These nations should
develop far more advanced Health Technology Assessment capabilities. Administration of
cost-effective resource allocation policies satisfies the unmet needs only to a certain extent.
This is clearly visible in the case of childhood rare diseases and orphan drugs, whose moral
justification grounds reimbursement of ultimately expensive therapeutic interventions.
Furthermore, re-engineered social and pension insurance systems are inevitably necessary
to tackle approaching deficiency of labor force and shrinking tax base of employees. Extended
work age legislation policies and heavier tax burden have already been imposed
in majority of these countries. Yet insufficiencies remain. How successful, timely and
adaptive shall the approaching health policy reforms be, remains to be seen in the third
decade of XXI century.
Study Limitations
This Review has adopted the structure of what is commonly described as picturesque
review in economic sciences. It has not been conducted as the Cochrane-styled systematic
review neither it fulfilled metanalytical approach. Yet it brings an important insights
into the health policy landscape in these societies across long historical horizon of approximately
three and half centuries. Authors made an ambitious attempt to understand
and explain chain of events leading to the establishment and evolution of national health
systems. In order to understand an uneasy nature of such work one should know that
only Ottoman Empire (without including Russian and Habsburg Empires ruling these
lands), dissolved in a total of forty modern day countries. Consecutively authors were
forced to prioritize and shortlist large amount of literature evidence. Structure of analytical
work and evidence synthesis have been carefully presented in a Table 1 shortlisting core
bibliographic information of all used evidence.
Further avenues for upgrading this research would primarily relate to the influence
of Middle Eastern, South Asian and African migrations reshaping the ethnic habitat and
socioeconomic milieu of traditional European communities. Additional exploration should
particularly deal with the impact of 4.0 Industrial Revolution and approaching of affordable
and effective robotics particularly in medical care of the elderly citizens and those
suffering from dementia. The third field requiring joint efforts of interdisciplinary health
sciences is the study of effects of Green Agenda on all of these evolutionary processes and
Environmental reforms gradually taking place across the region.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 11 of 18
Table 1. Evidence-bases stratification used during the preparation of this picturesque review article.
No Academic Journal or Book Ed. Title Authors Citation/Bibliography
1. Routledge; 2013.
When economies change
hands: A survey of
entrepreneurship in the
emerging markets of Europe
from the Balkans to the Baltic
States
Dana L.P. 10.4324/9780203049013
2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2009.
From the Soviet bloc to the
European Union: the
economic and social
transformation of Central and
Eastern Europe since 1973.
Berend I.T., Berend T.I. 10.1177/0265691411417598a
3. Globalization and Health. 2018
Population aging and
migration–history and UN
forecasts in the EU-28 and its
east and south near
neighborhood–one century
perspective 1950–2050.
Jakovljevic M.M., Netz Y.,
Buttigieg S.C., Adany R.,
Laaser U., Varjacic M.
14(1): 1–6.
4. Journal of Medical Economics. 2017
Within the triangle of
healthcare legacies:
comparing the performance
of South-Eastern European
health systems.
Jakovljevic M., Arsenijevic J.,
Pavlova M., Verhaeghe N.,
Laaser U., GrootW.
20(5): 483–492.
5. Sechenov University The University’s History.
https://www.sechenov.ru/
eng/about-msmu/history/
(accessed on
30 September 2021)
6. Journal of Medical Biography. 2003
Greek Professors of the
Medical School of
Constantinople during a
Period of Reformation
(1839–76).
Trompoukis C., Lascaratos J. 11 (4): 226–231
7. German Policy Studies (Politikfeldanalyse). 2009
A long farewell to the
Bismarck system: Incremental
change in the German health
insurance system. German
Policy Studies
(Politikfeldanalyse). 2009
Gerlinger T., Schmucker R. 5(1)
8. British Medical Journal. 2008 German health care: a bit of
Bismarck plus more science. Sawicki P.T., Bastian H. 337: 142–1145
9. Cambridge University Press; 2002.
Demographic behavior in the
past: A study of fourteen
German village populations
in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries.
Cambridge
Knodel J. E. ISBN: 978-0521892810
10. Economic History Review. 1992
Agricultural productivity and
European industrialization,
1890–1980.
O’Brien P.K., Prados L.,
La Escosura D. 45: 514–536.
11. Hist. Med. 2018
To the biography of N.A.
Semashko: The activities of
the first Commissar of Health
in 1920–1925.
Arsentyev E.V.,
Reshetnikov V.A. 3: 183–192.
12. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health. 2019
Analysis of the financing of
Russian health care over the
past 100 years.
Reshetnikov V.,
Arsentyev E.V., Bolevich S.,
Timofeyev Y.V., Jakovljevi´c M.
16(10): 1848
13. Journal of Rural Studies. 2019
The geography of poverty:
Review and research
prospects.
Zhou Y., Yansui L.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jrurstud.2019.01.008 (accessed
on 30 September 2021)
14. Social History of Medicine. 2020
The Implementation of the
Soviet Healthcare Model in
‘People’s
Democracy’Countries—the
Case of Post-war Poland
(1944–1953)
Kozłowska U., Sikorski T.
https://doi.org/10.1093/
shm/hkaa047 (accessed on
30 September 2021)
15. Central Asian Survey. 2006
The unfinished journey from
Semashko to Bismarck: health
reform in Central Asia from
1991 to 2006.
Borowitz M., Atun R. 25(4): 419–440.
16. Demographic Research. 2004
Fertility decisions in the FRG
and GDR: An analysis with
data from the German
Fertility and Family Survey.
Kreyenfeld M. 3: 275–318.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 12 of 18
Table 1. Cont.
No Academic Journal or Book Ed. Title Authors Citation/Bibliography
17. The European Journal of Health Economics.
2013
Resource allocation strategies
in Southeastern European
health policy.
Jakovljevic M.B. 14(2): 153–159
18. InWorld health forum. 1994
Between Beveridge and
Bismarck: options for health
care financing in Central and
Eastern Europe.
Cichon M., Normand C. 15(4): 323–328
19. Bull World Health Organ. 2013
Rocky road from the
Semashko to a new health
model.
Sheiman I. 91: 320–321
20. Frontiers in pharmacology. 2016
The new and old Europe:
east-west split in
pharmaceutical spending.
Jakovljevic M., Lazarevic M.,
Milovanovic O., Kanjevac T. 7: 18
21. Risk Management and Healthcare Policy. 2018
The evolving Semashko
model of primary health care:
the case of the Russian
Federation.
Sheiman I., Shishkin S.,
Shevsky V. 11: 209
22. Bulletin of the National Research Institute of
Public Health named after NA Semashko. 2015
The possibility of using
public-private partnership in
the health care of penitentiary
system personnel.
Iljintsev E.V., Iljintseva E.O.,
Vorobei S.V. 2.
23. The European Journal of Health Economics.
2013
Resource allocation strategies
in Southeastern European
health policy.
Jakovljevic M. B. 14(2): 153–159
24. Providing Compassionate Healthcare:
Challenges in Policy and Practice. 2014
Report by Lord Beveridge of
1942 advocating the creation
of a NHS. Care Quality
Council (CQC): Is an
organization set up by the UK
government to check whether
hospitals, care homes and
care services are meeting
national standards.
QC R.F. Beveridge Report 264
25. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 2000
Health insurance: the
influence of the Beveridge
Report.
Musgrove P. 78: 845–846
26. Economic Affairs. 2008
NHS as state failure: lessons
from the reality of
nationalised healthcare.
Evans H. 28(4): 5–9
27. Health Policy. 2015
Private health care
expenditure and quality in
Beveridge systems:
Cross-regional differences in
the Italian NHS.
Del Vecchio M., Fenech L.,
Prenestini A. 119(3): 356–366
28. British Journal of Healthcare Assistants. 2018 The NHS at 70.
BJHCA Board Members,
Grainger A., Mullen C.,
Peate I., Nazarko L.,
Jones M.L., Thomas V.
12(7): 318–325
29. Oxford University Press. 2010. The Silk Road in world
history. Liu X. 70(04):1156–1157
30. In Studies in Ottoman Naval History and
Maritime Geography. Gorgias Press.
2. Piri Reis and the Ottoman
Discovery of the Great
Discoveries.
Soucek S. 2011: 41–56
31. Agnus Madison Project
https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/
historicaldevelopment/
maddison/?lang=en
(accessed on
30 September 2021).
32. Globalization and Health. 2020
Real GDP growth rates and
healthcare
spending–comparison
between the G7 and the EM7
countries.
Jakovljevic M., Timofeyev Y.,
Ranabhat C.L.,
Fernandes P.O., Teixeira J.P.,
Rancic N., Reshetnikov V.
16(1): 1–13
33. International Journal for Equity in Health. 2017
Is the medical financial
assistance program an
effective supplement to social
health insurance for
low-income households in
China? A cross-sectional
study.
Liu K., Jing Y., Chunling L. 16(1): 1–13
34. Health Economics. 2017
Evolving health expenditure
landscape of the BRICS
nations and projections to
2025.
Jakovljevic M., Potapchik E.,
Popovich L., Barik D.,
Getzen T.E.
26(7): 844–852
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 13 of 18
Table 1. Cont.
No Academic Journal or Book Ed. Title Authors Citation/Bibliography
35. California Management Review. 2021
Technological Leadership and
5G Patent Portfolios: Guiding
strategic policy formulation1
and licensing decisions. 2020.
Teece D. 63(3):5–34
36. Long Range Planning. 2020
Transformer in Navigation:
Diverse Government Roles
for Open Innovation in
China’s High-speed Rail.
Mei L., Zhang N.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.
2020.102069 (accessed on
30 September 2021)
37. Actual problems of aviation and astronautics.
2015
Space exploration as one of
the components of Russia’s
economic growth.
Oleinik A.A., Sidorov I.T. 2 (11)
38. Springer Science & Business Media; 2007
The rebirth of the Russian
space program: 50 years after
Sputnik, new frontiers.
Harvey B. ISBN 978-0-387-71356-4
39. Pozna´ n. 2011
The American Space and the
Russian Cosmos as 20th and
21st century percepts of the
universe in the light of
selected aspects of their
national and the global
culture.
Boczkowska K. DOI:10.13140/RG.2.2.24057.62569
40. Trends and Development Prospects. 2015
The potential of ecovillages in
the socio-ecological
modernization of modern
Russia.
Rybakova M.V. 10 (2)
41. 10 Top Countries for Rare
Earth Metal Production. 2021 Pistilli M.
https://investingnews.com/
daily/resource-investing/
critical-metals-investing/
rare-earth-investing/rareearth-
metal-production/
(accessed on
25 September 2021)
42. Belt and Road Initiative Quick Info Green Belt and Road
Initiative Center
https:
//green-bri.org/belt-androad-
initiative-quick-info/
(accessed on
20 September 2021)
43. Journal of Business Economics and Management.
2017
Comparative analysis of the
Eastern European countries
as participants of the new silk
road.
Nazarko J.,
Czerewacz-Filipowicz K.,
Ku´zmicz K.A.
18(6): 1212–1227
44. Clingendael New Map of the Belt and
Road Initiative. 2021
from:
https://www.clingendael.
org/publication/new-mapbelt-
and-road-initiative
(accessed on
21 September 2021)
45. European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Chinas Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI)
https://www.ebrd.com/
what-we-do/belt-and-road/
overview.html (accessed on
27 September 2021)
46. Routledge, 2014. The Non-Aligned Movement
and the ColdWar.
Miskovic N., Fischer-Tiné H.,
Boskovska N.
https://www.routledge.com/
The-Non-Aligned-
Movement-and-the-Cold-
War-Delhi---Bandung---
Belgrade/Miskovic-Fischer-
Tine-Boskovska/p/book/97
80815373674 (accessed on
17 September 2021)
47.
Countries in China’s Belt and
Road Initiative: Who’s In
And Who’s Out. 2011
Sacks D.
https://www.cfr.org/blog/
countries-chinas-belt-androad-
initiative-whos-andwhos-
out (accessed on
15 September 2021)
48. Green Belt and Road Center Countries of the Belt and
Road Initiative (BRI).
https://green-bri.org/
countries-of-the-belt-androad-
initiative-bri (accessed
on 5 September 2021)/
49. UN DESA
Jointly building the “Belt and
Road” toward the Sustainable
Development Goals
https://www.un.org/en/
desa/jointly-building-%E2
%80%9Cbelt-and-road%E2%8
0%9D-toward-sustainabledevelopment-
goals (accessed
on 17 September 2021)
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 14 of 18
Table 1. Cont.
No Academic Journal or Book Ed. Title Authors Citation/Bibliography
50. OBOREurope Greece and the new 17 + 1
format. 2019
https://www.oboreurope.
com/en/greece-171-format/
(accessed on
23 September 2021)
51. Lietuvos Bankas
A Network of Fintech
Coordinators under the 17 + 1
Cooperation Format between
Central and Eastern European
Countries and China is
Created in Lithuania. 2019
https://www.lb.lt/en/news/
a-network-of-fintechcoordinators-
under-the-17-1
-cooperation-format-betweencentral-
and-easterneuropean-
countries-andchina-
is-created-in-lithuania
(accessed on
10 September 2021)
52. European Journal of Cancer. 2009
Bevacizumab in combination
with paclitaxel for HER-2
negative metastatic breast
cancer: an economic
evaluation.
Dedes K.J., Matter-Walstra K.,
Schwenkglenks M.,
Pestalozzi B.C., Fink D.,
Brauchli P., Szucs T.D
45(8): 1397–1406
53. Pharmacol. 2016
The new and old Europe:
east-west split in
pharmaceutical spending.
Jakovljevic M., Lazarevic M.,
Milovanovic O., Kanjevac T.
https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphar.2016.00018 (accessed on
11 September 2021)
54. OBOREurope
Montenegro’s debt dilemma:
an opportunity to improve
the BRI?
https:
//www.oboreurope.com/en/
montenegro-debt-dilemma/
(accessed on
30 September 2021)
55. OBOREurope China and the Kiribati
airstrip. 2021
https:
//www.oboreurope.com/en/
(accessed on
20 September 2021)
56. Understanding China‘s Belt
and Road Initiative. Cai P.
https:
//www.lowyinstitute.org/
publications/understandingbelt-
and-road-initiative
(accessed on
30 September 2021).
57. Habitat International. 2020
China’s poverty alleviation
resettlement: Progress,
problems and solutions
Yang, Y. De Sherbinin A.,
Liu Y. 98, 102135
58.
Health Silk Road 2020: A
Bridge to the Future of Health
for All.
Tilman H., Ye Y., Jian Y.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3
/papers.cfm?abstract_id=38
30380 (accessed on
30 September 2021).
59. China Quarterly of International Strategic
Studies. 2020
Toward a Health Silk Road:
China’s Proposal for Global
Health Cooperation
Cao J. 6(1): 19–35
60. CMS A new view of the belt and
road.
https://cms.law/en/int/
publication/belt-and-roadinitiative
(accessed on
30 September 2021)
61. Backbone of the nation bears
load. 2021 Yang H.
https:
//www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/
202104/22/WS6080dde2a310
24ad0bab98ea_3.html
(accessed on
30 September 2021).
62. Scientia Geographica Sinica. 2020
Modern human-earth
relationship and human-earth
system science
Liu Y.S. 40(8): 1221–123
63. Serbian Journal of Experimental and Clinical
Research. 2014
Health financing constrained
by population aging: an
opportunity to learn from
Japanese experience.
Ogura S., Jakovljevi´c M. 15(4): 175–181
64. Frontiers in Public Health. 2018
Global population
aging-health care, social and
economic consequences.
Ogura S., Jakovljevic M. 6: 335
65. Srpski Arhiv za Celokupno Lekarstvo. 2017 Population aging alongside
health care spending growth Jakovljevi´c M. 145(9–10): 534–539
66. SEEJPH. 2015
Population aging from 1950
to 2010 in seventeen
transitional countries in the
wider region of South Eastern
Europe.
Jakovljevic M., Ulrich L. 3
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 15 of 18
Table 1. Cont.
No Academic Journal or Book Ed. Title Authors Citation/Bibliography
67. Asymmetry and strategy: 371
The migrant crisis in Europe
as a security threat to the
Republica of Serbia
Kovaˇc M., Potkonjak-Luki´c B. ISBN 978-86-81121-17-7
68. Globalization and health. 2018
Population aging and
migration–history and UN
forecasts in the EU-28 and its
east and south near
neighborhood–one century
perspective 1950–2050
Jakovljevic M., Netz Y.,
Buttigieg S.C., Adany R.,
Laaser U., Varjacic M.
14(1): 1–6
69. Russia’s demographic crisis. 1996
Fertility decline and recent
changes in Russia: On the
threshold of the second
demographic transition.
Zakharov S.V., Ivanova E.I. 36–83
70. Global Journal of Business Research. 2011
How corruption affects social
expenditures: evidence from
Russia
Timofeyev Y. 5(4): 39–51
71. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2001
An analysis of Russia’s 1998
meltdown: Fundamentals
and market signals
Kharas H.J., Pinto B.,
Ulatov S. 1–68
72. Security Index: A Russian Journal on
International Security. 2007
Debating Russian
Demographic Security:
current trends and future
trajectories
Herd G.P., Sargsyan G. 13(2): 51–67
73. Health Policy and Management. 2005
Comparison of medical care
cost between hospice care and
conventional care in the last
year of life
Choi K. S., You C. H.,
Lee K. H., Kim C. Y., Heo D. S.
Yun, Y. H.
15(2): 1–15
74. Expert Review of Pharmacoeconomics &
Outcomes Research. 2016
Life expectancy and health
expenditure evolution in
Eastern Europe—DiD and
DEA analysis
Jakovljevic M.B., Vukovic M.,
Fontanesi J. 16(4): 537–546
75. Journal of medical economics. 2019
Comparative financing
analysis and political
economy of
noncommunicable diseases.
Jakovljevic M., Jakab M.,
Gerdtham U., McDaid D.,
Ogura S., Varavikova E.,
Merrick J., Adany R.,
Okunade A., Getzen T.E.
22(8): 722–727
76. Oxford Development Studies. 2006
Political and Economic
Influences on the Health and
Welfare of the Elderly in the
USSR and Russia: 1955–2005
Davis C.M. 34(4): 419–440
77. Dementia. 2006
Stigma and dementia: East
European and South Asian
family carers negotiating
stigma in the UK
Mackenzie J. 5(2): 233–247
78. In Women’s Studies International Forum.
Pergamon, 2001
All my life is one big nursing
home: Russian immigrant
women in Israel speak about
double caregiver stress
Remennick L.I. 24(6): 685–700
79. Journal of Economic Policy Reform. 2015
An empirical test of the
regional innovation paradox:
can smart specialisation
overcome the paradox in
Central and Eastern Europe?
Muscio A., Reid A.,
Rivera L.L. 18(2): 153–171
80. Globalization and Health. 2020
Real GDP growth rates and
healthcare
spending–comparison
between the G7 and the EM7
countries
Jakovljevic M., Timofeyev Y.,
Ranabhat C.L.,
Fernandes P.O., Teixeira J.P.,
Rancic N., Reshetnikov V
16(1): 1–13
81. International journal of environmental research
and public health. 2019
Underlying differences in
health spending within the
World Health Organisation
Europe Region—comparing
EU15, EU post-2004, CIS, EU
candidate, and
CARINFONET countries.
Jakovljevic M.,
Fernandes P.O., Teixeira J.P.,
Rancic N., Timofeyev Y.,
Reshetnikov V.
16(17): 30–43
82. International Journal of Sustainable
Development & World Ecology. 2010
A study of a sustainable
greenway approach for a part
of the Silk Road in Turkey.
Kurdoglu B. C., Yalcinalp E.,
Var M. 17(6): 515–528
83. Risk Management and Healthcare Policy. 2020
Predictors of (in) efficiencies
of Healthcare Expenditure
Among the Leading Asian
Economies–Comparison of
OECD and Non-OECD
Nations.
Jakovljevic M., Sugahara T.,
Timofeyev Y., Rancic N 13: 2261
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 16 of 18
Author Contributions: Corresponding author M.J. defined the core research questions and synthesized
evidence serving as the grounds for this review. M.J., A.A.C., Y.L., L.G., Y.T., K.K. and J.F. jointly
conceived the manuscript, contributing to its multiple revisions for important intellectual content.
All authors fulfilled ICMJE conditions for full authorship. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: Serbian part of this Lancet Europe contribution was co-funded through grant OI 175014 of
the Ministry of Education Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: None applicable on behalf of all the authors involved.
References
1. Dana, L.P. When Economies Change Hands: A Survey of Entrepreneurship in the Emerging Markets of Europe from the Balkans to the Baltic
States; Routledge: Abingdon on Thames, UK, 2013.
2. Berend, I.T. From the Soviet Bloc to the European Union: The Economic and Social Transformation of Central and Eastern Europe Since
1973; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2009.
3. Jakovljevic,M.M.; Netz, Y.; Buttigieg, S.C.; Adany, R.; Laaser, U.; Varjacic,M. Population aging andmigration—History and UNforecasts
in the EU-28 and its east and south near neighborhood–one century perspective 1950–2050. Glob. Health 2018, 14, 1–6. [CrossRef]
4. Jakovljevic, M.; Arsenijevic, J.; Pavlova, M.; Verhaeghe, N.; Laaser, U.; Groot, W. Within the triangle of healthcare legacies:
Comparing the performance of South-Eastern European health systems. J. Med. Econ. 2017, 20, 483–492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Sechenov University. Sechenov University History of the First and the Oldest Medical School in Russia. Available online:
https://www.sechenov.ru/eng/about-msmu/history/ (accessed on 30 September 2021).
6. Trompoukis, C.; Lascaratos, J. Greek professors of the Medical School of Constantinople during a period of reformation (1839–76).
J. Med. Biogr. 2003, 11, 226–231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Gerlinger, T.; Schmucker, R. A Long Farewell to the Bismarck System: Incremental Change in the German Health Insurance
System. German Policy Studies (Politikfeldanalyse). Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rolf_Schmucker/
publication/266582772_A_Long_Farewell_to_the_Bismarck_System_Incremental_Change_in_the_German_Health_Insurance_
System/links/5537accc0cf2058efdead2a0.pdf (accessed on 30 September 2021).
8. The Irish Times. NoWashing Our Hands of the Austro-Hungarian Legacy. 2017. Available online: https://www.irishtimes.com/lifeand-
style/health-family/no-washing-our-hands-of-the-austro-hungarian-legacy-1.3194555 (accessed on 30 September 2021).
9. Kidd, M.; Modlin, I.M. Van Swieten and the renaissance of the Vienna Medical School. World J. Surg. 2001, 25, 444–450. [CrossRef]
10. Sawicki, P.T.; Bastian, H. German health care: A bit of Bismarck plusmore science. Br. Med. J. 2008, 337, a1997. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Knodel, J.E. Demographic Behavior in the Past: A Study of Fourteen German Village Populations in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth
Centuries; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2002.
12. O’Brien, P.K.; Prados, L.; La Escosura, D. Agricultural Productivity and European Industrialization, 1890–1980. Econ. Hist. Rev.
1992, 45, 514. [CrossRef]
13. Arsentyev, E.V.; Reshetnikov, V.A. To the biography of N.A. Semashko: The activities of the first Commissar of Health in
1920–1925. Hist. Med. 2018, 3, 183–192.
14. Evans, H. NHS as state failure: Lessons from the reality of nationalised healthcare. Econ. Aff. 2008, 28, 5–9. [CrossRef]
15. Del Vecchio, M.; Fenech, L.; Prenestini, A. Private health care expenditure and quality in Beveridge systems: Cross-regional
differences in the Italian NHS. Health Policy 2015, 119, 356–366. [CrossRef]
16. BJHCA Board Members; Grainger, A.; Mullen, C.; Peate, I.; Nazarko, L.; Jones, M.L.; Thomas, V. The NHS at 70.
Br. J. Healthc. Assist. 2018, 12, 318–325. [CrossRef]
17. Liu, X. The Silk Road in World History; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2010.
18. Soucek, S. Piri Reis and Ottoman Discovery of the Great Discoveries. In Studies in Ottoman Naval History and Maritime Geography;
Gorgias Press: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2011; pp. 41–56.
19. Reshetnikov, V.; Arsentyev, E.; Bolevich, S.; Timofeyev, Y.; Jakovljevi´c, M. Analysis of the Financing of Russian Health Care over
the Past 100 Years. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 1848. [CrossRef]
20. Zhou, Y.; Liu, Y. The geography of poverty: Review and research prospects. J. Rural Stud. 2019, in press. Available online:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0743016718303899 (accessed on 30 September 2021). [CrossRef]
21. Kozłowska, U.; Sikorski, T. The Implementation of the Soviet Healthcare Model in ‘People’s Democracy’ Countries—The Case of
Post-war Poland (1944–1953). Soc. Hist. Med. 2020, hkaa047. [CrossRef]
22. Borowitz, M.; Atun, R. The unfinished journey from Semashko to Bismarck: Health reform in Central Asia from 1991 to 2006.
Cent. Asian Surv. 2006, 25, 419–440. [CrossRef]
23. Kreyenfeld, M. Fertility Decisions in the FRG and GDR: An Analysis with Data from the German Fertility and Family Survey.
Demogr. Res. Spec. Collect. 2004, 3, 275–318. [CrossRef]
24. Jakovljevic,M.B. Resource allocation strategies in Southeastern European health policy. Eur. J. Health Econ. 2012, 14, 153–159. [CrossRef]
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11038 17 of 18
25. Cichon, M.; Normand, C. Between Beveridge and Bismarck—Options for health care financing in central and eastern Europe.
World Health Forum 1994, 15, 323–328.
26. Sheiman, I. Rocky road from the Semashko to a new health model. Bull. World Health Organ. 2013, 91, 320–321. [PubMed]
27. Jakovljevic, M.; Lazarevic, M.; Milovanovic, O.; Kanjevac, T. The New and Old Europe: East-West Split in Pharmaceutical
Spending. Front. Pharmacol. 2016, 7, 18. [CrossRef]
28. Sheiman, I.; Shishkin, S.; Shevsky, V. The evolving Semashko model of primary health care: The case of the Russian Federation.
Risk Manag. Healthc. Policy 2018, 11, 209–220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Iljintsev, E.V.; Iljintseva, E.O.; Vorobei, S.V. The Possibility of Using Public-Private Partnership in the Health Care of Peni-Tentiary
System Personnel. Bulletin of the National Research Institute of Public Health Named after NA Semashko. Available online:
https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/the-possibility-of-using-public-private-partnership-in-the-health-care-of-penitentiarysystem-
personnel/viewer (accessed on 30 September 2021).
30. Shea, S.;Wynyard, R.; Lionis, C. Beveridge Report: Report by Lord Beveridge of 1942 Advocating the Creation of a NHS. Care
Quality Council (CQC): Is an Organization Set Up By the UK Government to Check Whether Hospitals, Care Homes and Care
Services Are Meeting National Standards. In Providing Compassionate Healthcare: Challenges in Policy and Practice; Routledge:
London, UK, 2014; p. 264.
31. Musgrove, P. Health insurance: The influence of the Beveridge Report. Bull. World Health Organ. 2000, 78, 845–846.
32. Agnus Madison Project. Available online: https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/?lang=en (accessed on
30 September 2021).
33. Jakovljevic, M.; Timofeyev, Y.; Ranabhat, C.L.; Fernandes, P.O.; Teixeira, J.P.; Rancic, N.; Reshetnikov, V. Real GDP growth rates
and healthcare spending—Comparison between the G7 and the EM7 countries. Glob. Health 2020, 16, 1–13. [CrossRef]
34. Liu, K.; Jing, Y.; Chunling, L. Is the medical financial assistance program an effective supplement to social health insurance for
low-income households in China? A cross-sectional study. Int. J. Equity Health 2017, 16, 1–13. [CrossRef]
35. Jakovljevic, M.; Potapchik, E.; Popovich, L.; Barik, D.; Getzen, T.E. Evolving Health Expenditure Landscape of the BRICS Nations
and Projections to 2025. Health Econ. 2016, 26, 844–852. [CrossRef]
36. Teece, D. Technological Leadership and 5G Patent Portfolios: Guiding Strategic Policy and Licensing Decisions. Calif. Manag. Rev.
2021, 63, 5–34. [CrossRef]
37. Mei, L.; Zhang, N. Transformer in navigation: Diverse government roles for open innovation in China’s high-speed rail.
Long Range Plan. 2020, in press. [CrossRef]
38. Oleinik, A.A.; Sidorov, I.T. Space exploration as one of the components of Russia’s economic growth. Actual Probl. Aviat. Astronaut.
2015, 2, 11.
39. Harvey, B. The Rebirth of the Russian Space Program: 50 Years After Sputnik, New Frontiers; Springer Science & Business Media:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2007.
40. Boczkowska, K. The American Space and the Russian Cosmos as 20th and 21st Century Percepts of the Universe in the Light of
Selected Aspects of Their National and the Global Culture. 2011. Available online: https://www.academia.edu/download/5996
7283/MA_ifa20190709-103507-u62ut2.pdf (accessed on 30 September 2021).
41. Rybakova,M.V. The potential of ecovillages in the socio-ecologicalmodernization ofmodern Russia. Trends Dev. Prospects. 2015, 10, 2.
42. Pistilli, M. 10 Top Countries for Rare Earth Metal Production. 2021. Available online: https://investingnews.com/daily/resourceinvesting/
critical-metals-investing/rare-earth-investing/rare-earth-metal-production/ (accessed on 30 September 2021).
43. Green Belt and Road Initiative Center. Belt and Road Initiative Quick Info. Available online: https://green-bri.org/belt-androad-
initiative-quick-info/ (accessed on 30 September 2021).
44. Nazarko, J.; Czerewacz-Filipowicz, K.; Kuzmicz, K. Comparative analysis of the eastern European countries as participants of the
new silk road. J. Bus. Econ. Manag. 2017, 18, 1212–1227. [CrossRef]
45. Clingendael. New Map of the Belt and Road Initiative. 2021. Available online: https://www.clingendael.org/publication/newmap-
belt-and-road-initiative (accessed on 30 September 2021).
46. European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Available online: https://www.
ebrd.com/what-we-do/belt-and-road/overview.html (accessed on 11 May 2021).
47. Miskovic, N.; Fischer-Tiné, H.; Boskovska, N. The Non-Aligned Movement and the Cold War; Routledge: Abingdon on Thames,
UK, 2014; Available online: https://www.routledge.com/The-Non-Aligned-Movement-and-the-Cold-War-Delhi---Bandung---
Belgrade/Miskovic-Fischer-Tine-Boskovska/p/book/9780815373674 (accessed on 30 September 2021).
48. Sacks, D. Countries in China’s Belt and Road Initiative: Who’s in and Who’s Out. 2011. Available online: https://www.cfr.org/
blog/countries-chinas-belt-and-road-initiative-whos-and-whos-out (accessed on 30 September 2021).
49. Green Belt and Road Center. Countries of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Available online: https://green-bri.org/countriesof-
the-belt-and-road-initiative-bri/ (accessed on 30 September 2021).
50. UN DESA. Jointly Building the “Belt and Road” towards the Sustainable Development Goals. Available online: https://www.un.org/en/
desa/jointly-building-%E2%80%9Cbelt-and-road%E2%80%9D-towards-sustainable-development-goals (accessed on 30 September 2021).
51. OBOREurope. Greece and the New 17 + 1 Format. 2019. Available online: https://www.oboreurope.com/en/greece-171-format/
(accessed on 30 September 2021).
52. Lietuvos Bankas. A Network of Fintech Coordinators under the 17 + 1 Cooperation Format between Central and Eastern
European Countries and China is Created in Lithuania. 2019. Available online: https://www.lb.lt/en/news/a-networkSustainability
2021, 13, 11038 18 of 18
of-fintech-coordinators-under-the-17-1-cooperation-format-between-central-and-eastern-european-countries-and-china-iscreated-
in-lithuania (accessed on 30 September 2021).
53. Dedes, K.J.;Matter-Walstra, K.; Schwenkglenks,M.; Pestalozzi, B.C.; Fink, D.; Brauchli, P.; Szucs, T.D. Bevacizumab in com-bination with
paclitaxel for HER-2 negativemetastatic breast cancer: An economic evaluation. Eur. J. Cancer 2009, 45, 1397–1406. [CrossRef]
54. OBOREurope. Montenegro’s Debt Dilemma: An Opportunity to Improve the BRI? 2021. Available online: https://www.
oboreurope.com/en/montenegro-debt-dilemma/ (accessed on 30 September 2021).
55. OBOREurope. China andtheKiribatiAirstrip. 2021. Available online: https://www.oboreurope.com/en/(accessed on 30 September 2021).
56. Cai, P. Understanding China’s Belt and Road Initiative. 2017. Available online: https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/
understanding-belt-and-road-initiative (accessed on 30 September 2021).
57. The State Council The People’s Republic of China.Available online: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2021-04/06/content_5597952.htm
(accessed on 30 September 2021).
58. Yang, Y.; De Sherbinin, A.; Liu, Y. China’s Poverty Alleviation Resettlement: Progress, Problems and Solutions. Habitat Internatl.
2020, 98, 102135. [CrossRef]
59. Tilman, H.; Ye, Y.; Jian, Y. Health Silk Road 2020: A Bridge to the Future of Health for All. 2021. Available online:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3830380 (accessed on 30 September 2021).
60. Cao, J. Toward a Health Silk Road: China’s Proposal for Global Health Cooperation. China Q. Int. Strateg. Stud. 2020, 6, 19–35. [CrossRef]
61. CMS. A New View of the Belt and Road. Available online: https://cms.law/en/int/publication/belt-and-road-initiative
(accessed on 30 September 2021).
62. Yang, H. Backbone of the Nation Bears Load. 2021. Available online: https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202104/22/WS608
0dde2a31024ad0bab98ea_3.html (accessed on 30 September 2021).
63. Liu, Y.S. Modern human-earth relationship and human-earth system science. Sci. Geogr. Sin. 2020, 40, 1221–1234.
64. Ogura, S.; Jakovljevi´c, M. Health financing constrained by population aging: An opportunity to learn from Japanese expe-rience.
Serb. J. Exp. Clin. Res. 2014, 15, 175–181. [CrossRef]
65. Ogura, S.; Jakovljevic,M. Global population aging-health care, social and economic consequences. Front. Public Health 2018, 6, 335. [CrossRef]
66. Jakovljevic, M. Population ageing alongside health care spending growth. Srp. Arh. Celok. Lek. 2017, 145, 534–539. [CrossRef]
67. Jakovljevic, M.; Ulrich, L. Population aging from 1950 to 2010 in seventeen transitional countries in the wider region of South
Eastern Europe. South East. Eur. J. Public Health 2015, 3. [CrossRef]
68. Kovaˇc, M.; Potkonjak-Luki´c, B. The migrant crisis in Europe as a security threat to the Republica of Serbia. In Asymmetry and
Strategy; Strategic Research Institute: Belgrade, Serbia, 2018; pp. 371–387. ISBN 978-86-81121-17-7.
69. Zakharov, S.V.; Ivanova, E.I. Fertility Decline and Recent Changes in Russia: On the Threshold of the Second Demographic
Transition. In Russia’s Demographic Crisis; RAND: Santa Monica, CA, USA, 1996; pp. 36–83.
70. Timofeyev, Y. How corruption affects social expenditures: Evidence from Russia. Glob. J. Bus. Res. 2011, 5, 39–51.
71. OurWorld in Data. Fertility Rate. 2021. Available online: https://ourworldindata.org/fertility-rate (accessed on 30 September 2021).
72. Kharas, H.J.; Pinto, B.; Ulatov, S. An analysis of Russia’s 1998 meltdown: Fundamentals and market signals. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act.
2001, 1, 1–68. [CrossRef]
73. Herd, G.P.; Sargsyan, G. Debating Russian Demographic Security: Current Trends and Future Trajectories. Secur. Index: A Russ. J.
Int. Secur. 2007, 13, 51–67. [CrossRef]
74. Choi, K.S.; You, C.H.; Lee, K.H.; Kim, C.Y.; Heo, D.S.; Yun, Y.H. Comparison of medical care cost between hospice care and
conventional care in the last year of life. Health Policy Manag. 2005, 15, 1–15.
75. Jakovljevic, M.B.; Vukovic, M.; Fontanesi, J. Life expectancy and health expenditure evolution in Eastern Europe—DiD and DEA
analysis. Expert Rev. Pharmacoecon. Outcomes Res. 2015, 16, 537–546. [CrossRef]
76. Jakovljevic,M.; Jakab,M.; Gerdtham, U.-G.;McDaid, D.; Ogura, S.; Varavikova, E.;Merrick, J.; Adany, R.; Okunade, A.; Getzen, T.E.
Comparative financing analysis and political economy of noncommunicable diseases. J.Med. Econ. 2019, 22, 722–727. [CrossRef]
77. Davis, C.M. Political and Economic Influences on the Health and Welfare of the Elderly in the USSR and Russia: 1955–2005.
Oxf. Dev. Stud. 2006, 34, 419–440. [CrossRef]
78. Mackenzie, J. Stigma and dementia: East European and South Asian family carers negotiating stigma in the UK. Dementia
2006, 5, 233–247. [CrossRef]
79. Remennick, L.I. “All my life is one big nursing home”: Russian immigrant women in Israel speak about double caregiver stress.
Women’s Stud. Int. Forum 2001, 24, 685–700. [CrossRef]
80. Muscio, A.; Reid, A.; Leon, L.R. An empirical test of the regional innovation paradox: Can smart specialisation overcome the
paradox in Central and Eastern Europe? J. Econ. Policy Reform 2014, 18, 153–171. [CrossRef]
81. Jakovljevic, M.; Fernandes, P.O.; Teixeira, J.P.; Rancic, N.; Timofeyev, Y.; Reshetnikov, V. Underlying differences in health spending
within the World Health Organisation Europe Region—Comparing EU15, EU post-2004, CIS, EU candidate, and CARINFONET
countries. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 3043. [CrossRef]
82. Kurdoglu, B.C.; Yalcinalp, E.; Var, M. A study of a sustainable greenway approach for a part of the Silk Road in Turkey. Int. J.
Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 2010, 17, 515–528. [CrossRef]
83. Jakovljevic, M.; Sugahara, T.; Timofeyev, Y.; Rancic, N. Predictors of (in)efficiencies of Healthcare Expenditure Among the Leading
Asian Economies—Comparison of OECD and Non-OECD Nations. Risk Manag. Healthc. Policy 2020, 13, 2261–2280. [CrossRef]
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.