Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nuclear Inst. andMethods in Physics Research, A
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nima
Deep ensemble analysis for Imaging X-ray Polarimetry
A.L. Peirson a,∗, R.W. Romani a, H.L. Marshall b, J.F. Steiner c, L. Baldini d
a Department of Physics & Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford, CA, 94305, United States of America
b Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA, 02139, United States of America
c Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States of America
d Universitá di Pisa and INFN-Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, I-56127, Italy
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Polarization
Deep learning
Machine learning
X-ray polarimeter
Gas pixel detector
IXPE
A B S T R A C T
We present a method for enhancing the sensitivity of X-ray telescopic observations with imaging polarimeters,
with a focus on the gas pixel detectors (GPDs) to be flown on the Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer
(IXPE). Our analysis determines photoelectron directions, X-ray absorption points and X-ray energies for 1-
9 keV event tracks, with estimates for both the statistical and model (reconstruction) uncertainties. We use a
weighted maximum likelihood combination of predictions from a deep ensemble of ResNet convolutional neural
networks, trained on Monte Carlo event simulations. We define a figure of merit to compare the polarization
bias–variance trade-off in track reconstruction algorithms. For power-law source spectra, our method improves
on the current planned IXPE analysis (and previous deep learning approaches), providing ∼ 45% increase in
effective exposure times. For individual energies, our method produces 20%–30% absolute improvements in
modulation factor for simulated 100% polarized events, while keeping residual systematic modulation within
1𝜎 of the finite sample minimum. Absorption point location and photon energy estimates are also significantly
improved. We have validated our method with sample data from real GPD detectors.
1. Introduction
X-ray polarization measurements offer rich opportunities to probe
the magnetic field topology and emission physics of high energy astrophysical
sources [1]. However, in the classical soft X-ray band
(1–10 keV) such measurements have long been elusive, with only the
Crab nebula providing a solid detection [2]. Happily, the recent development
of photo-electron tracking detectors [3] has greatly improved
soft X-ray polarimetry prospects. These imaging X-ray polarimeters
offer lower background and better control of systematic signals, and
allow the study of important extended sources, such as Supernova
Remnants (SNR) and Pulsar Wind Nebulae (PWNe). The gas pixel
detector (GPD) [see 4] has brought this capability to the PolarLight
CubeSat test [5], the scheduled IXPE mission [6], and the potential
Chinese mission, eXTP [7].
IXPE [8,9, planned for launch in 2021] will use three co-aligned Xray
telescopes, whose focal planes are imaged by GPDs with hexagonal
pixels. IXPE’s sensitivity is limited by the track analysis algorithm used
to recover source polarization, spatial structure and energy, given a
measured set of electron track images. In this work, we demonstrate
a substantial improvement over the current state of-the-art track reconstruction.
While the results shown here are specific to IXPE’s GPDs,
the methods are general, and can be applied to other imaging detector
geometries.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: alpv95@stanford.edu (A.L. Peirson).
In the 1−10 keV range, the cross-section for photoelectron emission
is proportional to cos2(𝜃), where 𝜃 is the angle between the normal incidence
X-ray’s electric vector position angle (EVPA) and the azimuthal
emission direction of the photoelectron. By measuring a large number
of individual photoelectron emission angles, one can recover the above
distribution to extract the source polarization parameters: polarization
fraction (0% ≤ 𝛱 ≤ 100%, or equivalently 0 ≤ 𝛱 ≤ 1) and EVPA
(−𝜋∕2 ≤ 𝜙 < 𝜋∕2). In practice, the recovery of photoelectron emission
angles from track images is imperfect. Track images are noisy due to
Coulomb scattering and diffusion, and, especially for low energies, are
often barely resolved from the Bragg peak emission at their ends. In
many cases a secondary Auger electron track further complicates the
analysis. The modulation factor 𝜇100, defined as the recovered 𝛱 for a
100% polarized source, provides a useful description of the quality of
the image reconstruction. For a measured source the true polarization
is then given by calibrating: 𝛱true = 𝛱meas∕𝜇100. In practice, track
reconstruction challenges make 𝜇100 highly energy dependent [10].
Critically, track reconstruction methods must not introduce significant
bias for an unpolarized source (𝛱 = 0). For IXPE the hexagonal
GPD pixels and a 120◦ rotation between the telescopes are designed
to minimize such x-y systematic biases. Thus the efficacy of an X-ray
polarimeter depends on the recovered 𝜇 at both 100% and 0% polarization.
For imaging X-ray polarimeters one also wishes to reconstruct
the X-ray absorption (conversion) points and event energy.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2020.164740
Received 6 July 2020; Received in revised form 29 September 2020; Accepted 5 October 2020
Available online 13 October 2020
0168-9002/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
The current track reconstruction method for the GPD is a moment
analysis described by Bellazzini et al. [11]. Impressive accuracies for
the absorption point and EVPA angle are achieved from a simple reweighted
combination of track moments, with the track barycenter
replacing the moment localization at low energies. Track energy estimates
are proportional to the total collected GPD charge. The track
ellipticity also provides a rough predictor for track reconstruction quality.
High ellipticity tracks typically have more accurate angle estimates.
However, simple moments cannot capture all of the image information,
especially for long high energy tracks, and so a more sophisticated
image analysis scheme should allow improved track parameters, as
well as better assessment of reconstruction quality. Recently, machine
learning techniques have been discussed as useful for X-ray polarization
measurements [12]; this is an ideal problem for such image analysis.
1.1. Deep learning for X-ray polarimetry
Deep neural networks (NNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance
on a wide variety of machine learning tasks and are becoming
increasingly popular in domains such as speech recognition [13],
natural language processing [14], bioinformatics [15] and especially
computer vision [16]. Going from track images to numerical estimates
can be classified as a computer vision problem, so it is not surprising
that NNs would be well suited to track reconstruction. The Cherenkov
Telescope Array (CTA) [17] team have applied related deep learning
methods to differentiate between cosmic rays and gamma rays. Notably
they also have to deal with a hexagonal pixel grid. The IceCube
collaboration has begun use of graph neural networks to identify 3D
neutrino tracks with great success [18].
Kitaguchi et al. [19] have recently described a NN photoelectron
track analysis for the non-imaging detector geometry that was intended
for the PRAXyS X-ray polarimetry mission [20]. Using convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), they show significant improvements in modulation
factor over a standard moment analysis for a square pixel
grid polarimeter while maintaining ≲ 1% modulation for unpolarized
data. While an excellent start, this analysis did not recover energies,
showed unexplained biases at the 1% level, used event cuts rather
than weights and provide only a binned polarization analysis. They
also trained for only a handful of event energies and were not able to
validate against real detector data. We have been able to improve on
this analysis addressing all of the issues above while delivering superior
performance across a wide (and continuous) range of energies.
The cornerstone of our approach involves deep ensembles [21].
These not only provide more accurate and less biased estimates than
single NNs, but also give state-of-the-art estimates of predictive uncertainty.
Using uncertainties in each of our track angle estimates,
we developed an unbinned weighted maximum likelihood estimate
(WMLE) approach to determine the final polarization parameters. This
removes the need for excising data, making use of all measurements.
With bootstrap analysis [22] we are able to infer the final error on our
polarization estimates and define an appropriate figure-of-merit (FoM)
to compare different track reconstruction approaches.
This paper describes our track reconstruction algorithm using deep
ensembles. Section 2 explains the extraction of angles, absorption
points and energies from individual tracks. Section 3 briefly outlines
our NN training procedure and selection. In Section 4 we describe
our WMLE approach that takes an ensemble of track angles and uncertainties
to final polarization parameters and their errors. There we
define a figure-of-merit to compare the moment analysis, our approach
and that of Kitaguchi et al. [19]. Section 5 shows our results and
their interpretation. We conclude the study, mentioning prospects for
additional improvements, in Section 6.
Fig. 1. Example IXPE GPD electron track images. The colormap represents charge
deposited in each pixel. The top row is simulated (5.9 keV, 2.7 keV), the bottom shows
real events of similar energy. For the simulated events, the blue dots and lines mark the
true absorption point and initial 𝑒− direction. Lower energy tracks are typically smaller
and less elliptical, thus harder to reconstruct. (For interpretation of the references to
colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
2. Deep ensembles for track reconstruction
We considered end-to-end deep learning approaches (as suggested
by Kitaguchi et al. [19]) to go directly from a set of tracks to source
polarization. There are a number of difficulties with this approach.
Training would be very expensive (perhaps infeasible) and it is not
obvious how to account for different track ensemble sizes. Also the
observer may wish to adjust partitioning of the data set into e.g. time,
energy and spatial subsets, with differing polarization. The best partition
will often not be obvious before analysis starts, thus combining
the properties of individual tracks allows a more efficient exploration
of binning options. Finally detector-dependent artifacts can best be
handled from individual tracks (with fine spatial positioning), rather
than point spread function (PSF) weighted ensembles. Forming such
ensembles in a second analysis tier allows additional flexibility.
For these reasons we do not consider a direct end-to-end approach
but use a two step process: (1) extract features from individual tracks
(angles, uncertainties, absorption points, energies) (2) combine an
ensemble of the features to measure the final polarization statistics.
However we do use the expected properties of polarized and unpolarized
ensembles to guide the training and select the most effective
networks. We first describe step (1): the event characterization.
2.1. Deep ensembles
To extract the angles, absorption points and energies from individual
tracks we use a supervised deep learning technique known as
deep ensembles [21]. Deep ensembles are made up of an ensemble of
individual NNs, each trained independently on the same data set to
predict the desired output features. It has been shown that different
random initializations of the same NN at the start of training leads
to widely different prediction functions [23]. Deep ensembles exploit
this property by incorporating the results of many differently initialized
NNs, increasing the diversity of predictors. Considering all of the
individual NN predictions together leads to a more robust, accurate,
and generalizable model with better uncertainty estimates [24].
2
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
Fig. 2. Example square conversions of a 6.4 keV hexagonal track (left panel). The six panels to the right show shifts along the 120◦ GPD axes; shifting odd rows (upper) or even
rows (lower). For each hexagonal track, NNs are fed column-wise pairs of square conversions, along with the energy, absorption point (blue dot) and initial photoelectron direction
(blue line) as labels. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
In our case, we have an image to feature(s) regression problem.
CNNs have been designed with an inductive bias appropriate for image
regression problems. So our deep ensemble will be made up of
individual CNNs.
Deep ensembles provide estimates of the predictive uncertainty.
There are two germane types of uncertainty one can model [25].
‘Aleatoric uncertainty’ captures noise inherent in the observations. This
is equivalent to statistical uncertainty. On the other hand, ‘epistemic
uncertainty’ accounts for uncertainty in the model parameters — uncertainty
which captures our ignorance about which model generated
our collected data. This uncertainty can be reduced given enough data,
and is often referred to as model uncertainty. We will model both of
these uncertainties using deep ensembles and use them in our final
polarization predictions in Section 4.
2.2. Hexagonal to square conversion
The hexagonal grid used in the IXPE GPDs is designed to minimize
polarization systematics, since hexapolar grid effects are orthogonal
to the quadrupolar polarization signal. Example imaged photoelectron
tracks at different energies are shown in Fig. 1. Unfortunately,
a hexagonal grid is not natively compatible with typical CNNs. It is
possible to transform from a hexagonal to a square grid, however a
naive transformation can lead to polarization biases and suboptimal NN
performance. This is partly because the CNN convolutional kernels are
not spatially equivariant in hexagonal space.
There are two main ways of converting between hexagonal and
square grids: interpolation and pixel shifting. Interpolation places a
fine square grid on top of the hexagonal image and interpolates. We
avoid using interpolation since it adds noise to the raw data and is not
easily reversible. Pixel shifting rearranges pixels by shifting alternate
rows and then rescaling. The HexagDLy [26] software, designed for
use in CTA, allows standard CNNs to operate on hexagonal images.
It does this by pixel shifting the images to square arrays and then
applying specialized convolutional kernels that preserve equivariance
in hexagonal space. Unfortunately, in practice, this method proved
too slow to train for the large event sets required for polarization
estimation. Accordingly, we simply pixel shift each track along each of
the six hexagonal axes (to avoid bias). Hexagonal tracks are rotated so
that rows align horizontally (this can be done in three different ways,
separated by 120◦), then alternate rows are shifted (this can be done
in two different ways, left and right) so that the track resembles a
rectangular grid, as in HexagDLy. We convert the rectangular grid into
a square image by defining the leftmost track pixel and bottom track
pixel as the left edge and the base of the image respectively. We use
a square image size of 50 × 50 pixels to fit all track sizes for energies
up to 9 keV. Since square track images are defined independently of
the absolute hexagonal coordinate values, the initial hexagonal track
rotation can be performed about any axis.
A single hexagonal track produces six square conversions (Fig. 2),
two for each 120◦ angle. A single training example for the NNs is formed
by stacking the corresponding square conversion pair, similarly to color
channels in a rgb image CNN problem – in this case with only two
channels. At test time all 3 pairs are evaluated by the NNs and the
predicted angles are rotated back to their original direction.
It should be noted that clean track images, such as those shown
in Fig. 1, already require a set of thresholding and clustering steps to
isolate individual tracks from a detector (or simulation) snapshot. These
are at present handled by IXPE’s GPD software. The track rectification
into the six square projections is simply an additional pre-processing
step that we apply in collecting a dataset for supervised training.
2.3. Training criteria
In a typical CNN regression problem, during training the CNN takes
as input a single image 𝐱𝑖 with feature label 𝑦𝑖 and outputs single prediction
𝑦̂𝑖. The NN parameters are optimized to minimize to the mean
squared error (MSE) on the training data set 𝛴𝑁
𝑖=1(𝑦𝑖−𝑦̂(𝐱𝑖))2∕𝑁. In order
to model the statistical uncertainty in predictions, individual networks
in a deep ensemble each minimize the negative log-likelihood:
𝐿(𝑦𝑖 ∣ 𝐱𝑖) =
log( ̂ 𝜎2(𝐱𝑖))
2
+
‖𝑦𝑖 − ̂ 𝑦(𝐱𝑖)‖22
2 ̂ 𝜎2(𝐱𝑖) . (1)
where 𝑦̂(𝐱𝑖) corresponds to the predicted mean and 𝜎̂ (𝐱𝑖)2 to the predicted
variance. The 𝐿2-norm is denoted by ‖.‖2. Thus the NN produces
an estimate of the feature and its statistical error (𝑦̂(𝐱𝑖), 𝜎̂ (𝐱𝑖)). In
practice however we train the NN to predict the log variance ̂ 𝑠(𝐱𝑖) =
log( ̂ 𝜎2(𝐱𝑖))
𝐿(𝑦𝑖 ∣ 𝐱𝑖) = ̂ 𝑠(𝐱𝑖)
2
+
𝑒−̂ 𝑠(𝐱𝑖)‖𝑦𝑖 − ̂ 𝑦(𝐱𝑖)‖22
2
(2)
since this is more numerically stable [25].
We estimate the track angle and its statistical error with the following
loss function,
𝐿𝜃 (𝜃𝑖 ∣ 𝐱𝑖) = ̂ 𝑠(𝐱𝑖)
2
+ 𝑒−̂ 𝑠(𝐱𝑖)
2
‖𝐯𝑖
2 − ̂
𝐯
2(𝐱𝑖)‖22
+ 𝛼.‖𝐯𝑖
1 − ̂
𝐯
1(𝐱𝑖)‖22
(3)
where 𝐯𝑖
2 = (cos 2𝜃𝑖, sin 2𝜃𝑖) and 𝐯𝑖
1 = (cos 𝜃𝑖, sin 𝜃𝑖) play the roles of the
features 𝑦𝑖. We parameterize the track angle 𝜃𝑖 as a unit 2D vector 𝐯𝑖
1 to
incorporate periodicity. By including a dipolar loss term ‖𝐯𝑖
2 −̂
𝐯
2(𝐱𝑖)‖22
,
we account for the 180◦ EVPA ambiguity. Without this additional term
the sign of the principal axis for poorly resolved tracks is ambiguous
3
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
and the CNN hedges its bets by selecting ̂
𝜃
orthogonal to the principal
axis; low energy polarization resolution suffers. The hyperparameter
𝛼 controls the relative importance of the monopole and dipole loss
terms. Since polarization estimation depends only on 2𝜃𝑖, we estimate
the statistical error only for the dipole term. Kitaguchi et al. [19]
include only the dipole term in their loss function. Recovering the full
directional information is, however, important for reducing detector
bias and aids in post-processing analysis; a loss function with both
terms produces the best results.
Since we also want to measure the absorption point and event
energy, we include the two additional loss function terms:
𝐿abs(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖 ∣ 𝐱𝑖) = 12
‖(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖) − ( ̂ 𝑥(𝐱𝑖), ̂ 𝑦(𝐱𝑖))‖22
(4)
𝐿E(𝐸𝑖 ∣ 𝐱𝑖) =
{
12
(
𝐸𝑖 − ̂
𝐸
(𝐱𝑖)
)2
, if 𝐸𝑖 − ̂
𝐸
(𝐱𝑖) ≤ 𝜖
𝜖|𝐸𝑖 − ̂
𝐸
(𝐱𝑖)| − 12
𝜖2, otherwise
(5)
where 𝐸𝑖 are the event energies and 𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖 the coordinates of the
absorption point in the rectified grid. We use an asymmetric Huber
loss function (Eq. (5)) for the energy to avoid high energy tails in
predictions. These are destructive to IXPE’s energy resolution since
astrophysical spectra and IXPE’s effective area will yield significantly
more low energy events. The same result can be effected by training the
NNs on a power law of track energies, instead of a flat distribution. The
hyperparameter 𝜖 controls the degree of asymmetry. Since our primary
objective is polarization, we do not include separate location and
energy statistical error parameters in the minimization. Nevertheless,
as we will show, this method demonstrably improves localization and
energy resolution.
In sum, our total multi-component loss function is
𝐿(𝜃𝑖, 𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖,𝐸𝑖 ∣ 𝐱𝑖) = 𝐿𝜃 + 𝛽𝐿abs + 𝛾𝐿E(𝜖) + 𝛿‖𝑤‖2 (6)
with hyperparameters 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾, 𝛿, 𝜖 that are tuned during training (Section
4). The final term is a 𝐿2-norm regularization on the NN parameters
𝑤. This is a common machine learning regularization scheme
which prevents overfitting. Each individual CNN is trained to minimize
Eq. (6). The CNN computations take individual (square) track images
𝐱𝑖 as input and output the feature vector
(cos 𝜃𝑖, sin 𝜃𝑖, 𝜎𝐬
𝑖 , 𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖,𝐸𝑖), (7)
where superscript 𝐬 in 𝜎𝐬
𝑖 denotes the predicted statistical, or aleatoric,
error.
In practice, after training a set of NNs, we select a best-performing
subset for inclusion in the final deep ensemble. This selection is described
in Section 3. We can model the epistemic uncertainty in our
feature estimates by combining the final feature predictions from all
the NNs in our ensemble. For each track, 𝐱𝐢, a deep ensemble of 𝑀
networks 𝑗 = 1,…,𝑀 produces 𝑀 output feature vectors (Eq. (7)). We
calculate the epistemic uncertainty as the standard deviation of 2𝜃𝑖𝑗
over the NN ensemble predictions 𝑗. Since 2𝜃𝑖𝑗 are periodic, we use a
von Mises distribution to estimate the standard deviation in 2𝜃𝑖𝑗 over
𝑗:
𝑅𝑖 =
[
1
𝑀
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
cos 2𝜃𝑖𝑗 ,
1
𝑀
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
sin 2𝜃𝑖𝑗
]
, (8)
𝜎𝐞
𝑖 =
√√√√
1 − ‖𝑅𝑖‖22
‖𝑅𝑖‖2(2 − ‖𝑅𝑖‖22
)
. (9)
For small scatter this reduces to the normal standard deviation. The
total error 𝜎𝑖 on angle prediction 𝜃𝑖 for track 𝐱𝐢 is then given by the
quadrature combination
𝜎2
𝑖 =
(
𝜎𝐞
𝑖
2
)2
+ 1
𝑀
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
(
𝜎𝐬
𝑖𝑗
2
)2
, (10)
where the factors of 1∕2 transform from errors on 2𝜃𝑖 to errors on 𝜃𝑖.
3. NN training and selection
Here we describe the training procedure for individual NNs (Section
4.1) in the ensemble and the process of NN selection for ensemble
membership.
3.1. Data sets
Our training and validation data sets consist of simulated tracks
(e.g. Fig. 1) generated via a Monte Carlo Geant4 [27] simulation, part
of IXPE’s GPD software suite [11]. The track energies uniformly span
1.0–9.0 keV, IXPE’s most sensitive range and are unpolarized (uniform
track angle distribution). We simulate for the expected IXPE gas pressure
of 687 mbar. Each track is labeled with its 2D track angle vector
(cos 𝜃, sin 𝜃), absorption point coordinates (on the square grid) (𝑥, 𝑦) and
its energy 𝐸. This gives a final feature vector (cos 𝜃, sin 𝜃, 𝑥, 𝑦,𝐸). We
simulate 3.5 million tracks with a flat energy distribution. We split
these 3.5 million tracks into a training set, validation set and test set
where the validation set and test set make up 5% of the total. Finally we
have tested the performance on tracks from real GPDs; while we do not
describe the detailed response here, we find polarization performance
very similar to that realized from the simulated tracks.
3.2. Training
We use a ResNet-19 [28] CNN architecture as our base NN. ResNets
and their variants (like DenseNet [29]) are the current state of the
art in image classification. They contain ‘skip’-connections in between
their layers that lead to faster and more robust training. This particular
architecture is large enough to over-fit the training set, and trains
in a reasonable amount of time (∼15 h for 150 epochs on 4 Nvidia
Titan GPUs, using a batch size of 2048). Before training we normalize
the track images, subtracting the pixel-wise mean from each track
image and dividing by the pixel-wise standard deviation (where the
mean and standard deviation are calculated over the full training set).
The track energy and absorption point labels are similarly processed.
Normalizing the training data helps prevent vanishing and exploding
gradients during the NN training procedure and lead to faster convergence.
We use stochastic gradient descent with momentum as our
optimizing algorithm, typical in computer vision tasks [30], with a
stepped decaying learning rate starting at 0.01. We choose batch sizes
of 512, 1024, 2048 tracks. The training procedure seeks to minimize
the loss function given by Eq. (6) over the NN parameters. We tune
the hyperparameters 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾, 𝛿, 𝜖 to minimize the MSE on the predicted
track angle for the validation set, while retaining energy and absorption
point accuracy. We find, typically, 𝛼 ∼ 1, 𝛽 ∼ 0.2, 𝛾 ∼ 0.2, 𝛿 ∼ 5 × 10−5
and 𝜖 ∼ 0.5 keV work well for angle accuracy and energy resolution.
Absorption point and energy resolution depend weakly on the choice
of 𝛽 and 𝛾. The values of 𝛽 and 𝛾 are < 1, reflecting our choice to focus
on the measurement of track angles.
3.3. Selection
For our deep ensemble, we train 27 individual NNs in the manner
described above – 9 NNs for each of the 3 different batch sizes
(encouraging model diversity). We use the entire training data set for
each NN since deep NNs typically perform better with more data. After
training these individual NNs, we down-select to the best performing
10, as measured by the track angle MSE loss 𝐿𝜃 (Eq. (3)) on the
reserved test set. For the test set all three rectified track image pairs are
evaluated, and the resulting track angle predictions are rotated back,
to remove any imprinted hexagonal angle prediction bias. Since we
save a checkpoint every 10 epochs during the training, we evaluate the
NNs at all middle-late stages of their training in our selection, retaining
the best stage. This form of early-stopping helps prevent over-fitting of
the training set. Fig. 3 shows the photoelectron angle recovery for an
4
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
Fig. 3. NN (left) and moments (middle) predicted photoelectron angle ̂
𝜃
vs. true photoelectron angle 𝜃 for 3.0 (top) and 6.4 (bottom) keV. Right: histograms of the angle differences.
Our NN predictions have more measurements at the true angle (fewer 𝜋 offsets at low energy), and better recovery of the true 𝜃, especially at higher energies. Note that a 𝜋
ambiguity in prediction does not affect polarization measurement, which depends on 2̂𝜃
.
Fig. 4. Distribution of deep ensemble predicted total errors 𝜎 (Eq. (10)) across the IXPE energy spectrum (left). The right-hand plot shows the 𝜎 distribution for two specific
energies 3.0 keV (red), 6.4 keV (blue). Low energy tracks tend to cluster around higher predictive uncertainty. High energy tracks have a tail of poorly predicted examples. Many
of these correspond to the events converting outside the gas volume (see falling black curve in Fig. 5). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
ensemble of NNs and the moment analysis at two example energies, 3.0
and 6.4 keV.
In principle, absorption point and energy resolution errors could
be factored into the NN down-selection, but since polarization is our
principal interest (and the most difficult to train), we focus on 𝐿𝜃 . The
results in Section 5 obtain from ensembles of the 10 networks with the
lowest 𝐿𝜃 .
4. Polarization estimation
Unlike many typical deep learning problems, polarization estimation
requires predicting a distribution measurement from a large number
of events. We have split the problem in two, first extracting features
via NNs (Section 2), then forming the required measurement. Here
we combine our deep ensemble’s feature predictions to produce best
estimates for the polarization fraction 𝛱, EVPA 𝜙 and their errors.
The basic problem is to estimate 𝛱 and 𝜙 from a set of measured
track angles {𝜃𝑖}𝑁𝑖
=1. As described in the introduction, the track angles
exhibit a sinusoidal modulation with period 𝜋
𝑝(𝜃|𝜇, 𝜙) = 1
2𝜋
(
1 + 𝜇 cos
[
2(𝜃 − 𝜙)
])
(11)
where 0 ≤ 𝜇 ≤ 1, −𝜋∕2 ≤ 𝜙 < 𝜋∕2 and −𝜋 ≤ 𝜃 < 𝜋. The intrinsic
polarization fraction is then given by 𝛱 = 𝜇∕𝜇100. While simple
analyses often bin the data set {𝜃𝑖}𝑁𝑖
=1 and then fit to estimate 𝜇, 𝜙, this
provides an inevitable loss of information, and poor performance when
the bin counts are limited. Maximum likelihood methods are preferable,
being unbinned. Kislat et al. [31] have developed an unbinned method,
working with total Stokes parameters. They define
𝑄 = 2
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
cos 2𝜃𝑖 (12a)
5
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
𝑈 = 2
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
sin 2𝜃𝑖 (12b)
where 𝑁 is total number of track angles 𝜃𝑖. Then 𝜇, 𝜙 can be simply
calculated as
𝜇 = 1
𝑁
√(
𝑄2 + 𝑈2
)
(13a)
𝜙 = 1
2
arctan 𝑈
𝑄
(13b)
The strength of this kind of analysis is that the errors on the Stokes
parameter are easily computed and well behaved. This method is
unbiased and faster than a full maximum likelihood fit.
However, the different events can give quite varied constraining
power. For example, low-energy short tracks inevitably have poorly
constrained 𝜃 (and, given the typical astrophysical energy spectrum and
the detector response, most events will have low energy!). A subset of
events with higher energy or cleaner, longer tracks may be most useful.
For this reason it is essential to incorporate some form of quality control
in the tracks we use for our polarization estimates. Traditionally one
applies track cuts, but this is a sub-optimal since one can throw away
a large fraction of the data. A weighting scheme should be preferred.
It is possible to incorporate event weights into the Stokes parameters
method by defining:
𝑄 = 2
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
𝑤𝑖 cos 2𝜃𝑖, (14a)
𝑈 = 2
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
𝑤𝑖 sin 2𝜃𝑖, (14b)
𝐼 =
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
𝑤𝑖 (14c)
where 𝑤𝑖 is the relative weight for the event angle 𝜃𝑖 and 𝐼 is used
instead of 𝑁 in Eq. (13).
Fig. 4 shows the distribution of NN predicted total errors 𝜎 for
track data sets spanning all energies. These are equivalent to the track
reconstruction quality. Even high energy data sets show tails of poorly
reconstructed tracks.
4.1. Importance weighted maximum likelihood
Our deep NN ensembles provide us with statistical and epistemic
error estimates for each event. Our approach is to incorporate these
into our measurement of the polarization parameters. In maximum
likelihood estimation, the negative log-likelihood of the polarization
parameters given the measured track angles is minimized over the
likelihood domain:
minimize
over𝜇,𝜙
−
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
log
(
1 + 𝜇 cos
(
2(𝜃𝑖 − 𝜙)
))
subject to 0 ≤ 𝜇 ≤ 1
−𝜋∕2 ≤ 𝜙 < 𝜋∕2,
(15)
where Eq. (11) is used as the likelihood function 𝐿({𝜃𝑖}|𝜇, 𝜙) and we
have dropped constant terms, since they do not affect the minimization.
The optimal values of Eq. (15), (𝜇⋆, 𝜙⋆), are the final polarization estimates.
An approximation of errors on these estimates (or equivalently
on the Stokes fluxes from the source) can be calculated analytically
using Fisher information. We make the substitution 𝜇 = 𝛱𝜇100 to get
𝜎(𝛱) ≈ 1
𝜇100
√
2 − (𝛱𝜇100)2
(𝑁 − 1)
(16a)
𝜎(𝜙) ≈ 1
𝛱𝜇100
√
2(𝑁 − 1)
. (16b)
Note both errors depend strongly on the modulation factor 𝜇100, with
higher modulation factors leading to smaller prediction errors. There is
also a dependence on the total number of measured tracks 𝑁, making
extensive track cuts detrimental.
We modify Eq. (15) to an importance-weighted maximum likelihood
estimate
minimize
over𝜇,𝜙
−
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
𝜎−𝜆
𝑖𝑗 log
(
1 + 𝜇 cos
(
2(𝜃𝑖𝑗 − 𝜙)
))
subject to 0 ≤ 𝜇 ≤ 1
−𝜋∕2 ≤ 𝜙 < 𝜋∕2,
(17)
where 𝑀 is the number of NNs in the deep ensemble, 𝜃𝑖𝑗 are the
predicted track angles and 𝜎𝑖𝑗 =
√
(𝜎𝐬
𝑖𝑗∕2)2 + (𝜎𝐞
𝑖 ∕2)2 are the total
predicted errors on 𝜃𝑖𝑗 (Section 2.3). The 𝑗th NN in the ensemble makes
a prediction (𝜃𝑖𝑗 , 𝜎𝑖𝑗 ) for the 𝑖th track. The predicted errors 𝜎−1
𝑖𝑗 are
used as importance weights [32,33], so that low 𝜎 tracks are weighted
more strongly. The parameter 𝜆 controls a simple weighting scheme:
for 𝜆 = 0 the log-likelihood is unweighted and we recover the Stokes
method (Eqs. (9) and (10)). With high 𝜆 the best-measured tracks
dominate the polarization estimate. This increases 𝜇100 but leads to
larger fluctuations in the estimated values, as well as increased sensitivity
to reconstruction biases (e.g. when 𝜃 aligns with the underlying
hexagonal grid, giving cleaner tracks). In Section 4.2 we provide a
prescription for selecting 𝜆. The best 𝜆 will depend on the source
spectrum.
We can rewrite Eq. (17) as a convex optimization problem:
minimize
over 𝐱
−
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
𝜎−𝜆
𝑖𝑗 log
(
1 + 𝐯𝑇
𝑖𝑗𝐱
)
subject to ‖𝐱‖2 ≤ 1
(18)
where 𝐯𝑖𝑗 = (cos 𝜃𝑖𝑗 , sin 𝜃𝑖𝑗 ) and 𝐱 = (𝜇 cos 𝜙, 𝜇 sin 𝜙). By recasting
Eq. (17) as a convex optimization problem, we have a guaranteed
globally optimal solution for (𝜇, 𝜙). We can solve Eq. (18) quickly and
efficiently using second order Newton methods. In practice we use the
robust open source software Ipopt [34].
When we include the full distribution of 𝑀 track angle predictions,
we most accurately approximate the true model uncertainty. However,
it is possible to simplify the analysis by averaging the track angle
predictions 𝜃𝑖𝑗 over 𝑗:
𝜃𝑖 = 1
2
atan2
( 1
𝑀
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
sin 2𝜃𝑖𝑗 ,
1
𝑀
𝑀Σ
𝑗=1
cos 2𝜃𝑖𝑗
)
(19)
and using 𝜎𝑖 (Eq. (10)) for the total error on 𝜃𝑖. This allows the
importance weighted maximum likelihood to recover the weighted
Stokes analysis (Eqs. (13)–(14)), where 𝑤𝑖 = 𝜎−𝜆
𝑖 . This approximation
is much easier to compute, but does not fully exploit the epistemic
uncertainty.
4.2. Figure of merit
We require a figure-of-merit (FoM) for the polarization measurement,
a scalar value representing the signal to noise ratio of a given
detector and analysis scheme. The standard figure-of-merit used in
X-ray polarimetry currently is the minimum detectable polarization
(MDP) [35]. MDP99 is the polarization fraction that has a 1% probability
of being exceeded by chance for an unpolarized source. The
probability 𝑝(𝜇, 𝜙) of measuring modulation 𝜇 and EVPA 𝜙 given that
the true modulation and phase are 𝜇0 and 𝜙0 is [35]
𝑝(𝜇, 𝜙) = 𝑁𝜇
4𝜋
exp
(
−𝑁4
[
𝜇2 + 𝜇2
0 − 2𝜇𝜇0 cos 2(𝜙 − 𝜙0)
])
. (20)
Here 𝑁 is the total number of measured tracks as usual. The MDP99
may be found by integrating Eq. (20) for 𝜇0 = 0, resulting in
MDP99 ≈ 4.29
𝜇100
√
𝑁
(21)
6
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
where 𝜇100 accounts for imperfect polarization recovery; the source
polarization will be 𝛱 = 𝜇∕𝜇100. Note the similarity to Eq. (16a): MDP
is effectively a (inverse) ratio of recovered signal 𝜇100 to noise ∼ 1∕
√
𝑁.
For a given detector, track reconstruction algorithms with lower MDPs
are better.
For a weighted polarization estimate, the error on recovered 𝛱, 𝜙,
and equivalently the noise denominator term
√
𝑁, is no longer given by
the total number of tracks since some tracks can contribute significantly
more than others. We define 𝑁eff to replace 𝑁 in the MDP99, and in
Eq. (16b), for a weighted scheme. For the weighted Stokes method
(Eq. (14)),
𝑁eff = 𝐼2∕
𝑁Σ
𝑖=1
𝑤2
𝑖
. (22)
For an importance weighted maximum likelihood incorporating all 𝑀
NN ensemble predictions (Eq. (17)) there is no closed form solution for
𝑁eff . However, with numerical simulations we can study the variance
of our importance weighted maximum likelihood results and measure
the effective 𝜇0, if any, from the offset and 𝑁eff from the width. This
allows us to use MDP99 as our ’Figure of Merit’ for comparing analysis
schemes, including cuts and weights, when we replace 𝑁 by 𝑁eff in
Eq. (21), where we determine 𝑁eff by fitting Eq. (20) to a bootstrapsampled
distribution of (𝜇, 𝜙) for an unpolarized source. In this fit, we
maximize the likelihood 𝑝({𝜇, 𝜙} ∣ 𝑁, 𝜇0, 𝜙0), where {𝜇, 𝜙} is our set of
bootstrap samples. The optimal value (𝑁⋆, 𝜇⋆
0 , 𝜙⋆
0 ) defines 𝑁eff = 𝑁⋆.
We do not include the estimator bias 𝜇⋆
0 directly in the FoM because
any useful estimator should either have a negligible bias or the bias, if
known, should be divided out (as in Kitaguchi et al. [19]); 𝜇⋆
0 is simply
a tool to evaluate any residual bias in the track reconstruction. Indeed,
we find that the 𝜇⋆
0 are small, consistent with the residual statistical
polarization in our finite-sized event sets.
Bootstrapping works for any algorithm (when one can compute sufficient
bootstrap samples), so this FoM can be used for all polarization
estimation methods discussed, with or without event cuts or weights.
For a given set of tracks, the weighting scheme 𝜆 for our importance
weighted MLE (Eq. (17)) is chosen by evaluating the MDP99 for a
set of 𝜆s and choosing the best performer. Using the weighted Stokes
approximation – where prediction from the 𝑀 NNs in the ensemble are
averaged for each track – the best 𝜆 is faster to compute since 𝑁eff is
given analytically (Eq. (22)); no bootstrapping is required. In Section 5
we identify the best 𝜆 using the weighted Stokes approximation first,
then apply the full importance weighted MLE, using the bootstrap
analysis to find the final MDP99. We show examples of the bootstrap
fits in Section 5.
5. Results
All of the training, testing and validation have been performed
on the simulated event track images. These have been used to train
NNs and down-select to an ensemble having maximum sensitivity and
minimum residual error. We have performed limited tests with real
GPD data and confirm that we can obtain comparable accuracy with
these images, but unsimulated physical effects in the GPD hardware and
the peculiarities of individual flight GPD will require networks tuned
for specific devices. Here we focus on the general performance.
5.1. Polarization
To maximize polarization sensitivity, the appropriate metric for performance
is the FoM defined in Section 4.2. However, it is instructive
to examine the 𝜇100 and unpolarized 𝜇0 energy dependence across
the IXPE spectral range. We show these results for simulated data in
Fig. 5 for our method with and without weights, and the moment
analysis with and without cuts. In the upper panel, the black line at top
shows the modulated signal from a simulated data set corresponding
to a 100% polarized (𝛱 = 1) source. The decrease toward high
Fig. 5. Modulation response for analysis of simulated GPD tracks. Top: The available
signal 𝜇 for a 100% polarized source, after dilution by window/GEM conversion events
(black dotted line). Standard moments analysis and moments with a 20% ellipticity cuts
are compared with the deep ensemble NN analysis with uniform weighting. The NN
𝜇 improves using 𝜆 = 1 (dots) and 𝜆 = 2 (crosses) weights. Middle: Response to an
unpolarized signal. Triangular points show the residual polarization of the ∼ 3.4 × 105
event simulation, with 1𝜎 error bars. Solid (moments with 20% cuts) and dashed (NN
𝜆 = 1) bands show the recovered signal 1𝜎 statistical uncertainty ranges. Bottom:
Recovered EVPA error for a polarized signal. Triangular error bars show the residual
EVPA from the finite simulation. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
energy represents the increasing fraction of events which convert in
the detector window or the GEM foil. These are truncated and/or highly
scattered, with a fraction of the normal gas energy deposition and retain
little polarization information. Thus perfect reconstruction can at best
reach the black line. The blue solid line shows the performance of the
mission default (Moments) analysis. If one knows the event energy a
priori (e.g. for a calibration source) one can cut on recovered energy
to remove many of the incomplete tracks, improving the polarization
response (blue dotted line). For astrophysical sources with unknown
event energies, this simple effective prescription cannot be applied.
More sophisticated shape cuts could in principle recover a fraction of
this improvement — however one must recall that these cuts decrease
the sample size and when considering the polarization sensitivity of a
given data set, this substantially reduces the gains from the cuts.
The performance of our initial NN analysis (red dashed line) is
better than the moments analysis and at high energies, even matches
moments after the ellipticity cuts. Of course, we can use our event quality
metric to make a better weighted measurements (red starred and
dotted lines) and this substantially increases the modulation sensitivity,
at a modest cost in the effective number of sample events.
While high polarization sensitivity 𝜇100 is desired, it is essential that
the analysis chain not induce spurious signals from unpolarized sources.
7
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
Fig. 6. Track angle recovery for unpolarized (top row) and polarized (bottom row) simulated data for 3.0 and 6.4 keV. The original photoelectron angle distribution is shown in
black; standard moment analysis reconstruction is in blue and unweighted NNs in red. The top panels show negligible residual polarization, the bottom panels show lack of bias
and a modest increase in NN sensitivity, especially at higher energies. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of this article.)
Table 1
Sensitivity analysis for 105 2-8 keV photons with a 𝑑𝑁∕𝑑𝐸 ∼ 𝐸−2 spectrum and IXPE’s
energy response. MDP99 gives the sensitivities for the various cuts and weights; smaller
MDP99 is better. The arrows show the minimum MDP99 found by optimizing over 𝜆.
With a bootstrap analysis (Fig. 7), the weighting takes better advantage of the epistemic
uncertainty for a small additional MDP99 decrease at this 𝜆.
Method 𝜇100(%) 𝑁eff ∕𝑁 𝜆 MDP99(%)
Mom. 27.0 1.0 0 5.03 ± 0.02
Mom. w/ cut 31.3 0.796 – 4.88 ± 0.03
Mom. w/ weights 31.4 0.878 0.67 4.61 ± 0.01 ←
NN 28.7 1.0 0 4.72 ± 0.02
NN w/ weights 32.6 0.954 1 4.26 ± 0.02
NN w/ weights 36.8 0.812 1.83 4.09 ± 0.02 ←
NN w/ weights (bootstrap) 36.1 0.852 1.83 4.07 ± 0.02 ←
NN w/ weights 37.7 0.763 2 4.12 ± 0.02
The middle panel summarizes tests for this effect. The finite size of
the simulated unpolarized data set guarantees a residual statistical polarization.
This is shown by the black triangles; an ideal measurement
should not induce polarization significantly in excess of this value. The
colored traces show the 1𝜎 range for weighted NNs and the moment
analysis with cuts. We see that the NN analysis induces no significant
polarization and, like the moments analysis, meets mission requirements
at all energies. The slightly larger 1𝜎 range on the moment
Table 2
Sensitivity analysis, as for Table 1, but for 105 2-8 keV photons with a 𝑑𝑁∕𝑑𝐸 ∼ 𝐸−1
spectrum and IXPE’s energy response.
Method 𝜇100(%) 𝑁eff ∕𝑁 𝜆 MDP99(%)
Mom. 29.9 1.0 0 4.55 ± 0.02
Mom. w/ cut 34.7 0.804 – 4.36 ± 0.01
Mom. w/ weights 35.1 0.867 0.60 4.15 ± 0.01 ←
NN 32.1 1.0 0 4.22 ± 0.02
NN w/ weights 37.3 0.935 1 3.76 ± 0.01
NN w/ weights 41.2 0.812 1.65 3.65 ± 0.01 ←
NN w/ weights (bootstrap) 40.9 0.835 1.65 3.63 ± 0.01 ←
NN w/ weights 43.6 0.707 2 3.70 ± 0.01
analysis with cuts are a marker for increased measurement noise —
the trade off between increased signal vs. noise is best evaluated with
our FoM. Here we are measuring a small residual signal so the energy
bins are larger, containing ∼ 340, 000 test tracks.
We can compare with the PRAXyS NN simulation results of
Kitaguchi et al. [19] for the non-imaging low pressure PRAXyS detector.
While their 𝜇100 sensitivity (at three energies) is roughly at the position
of our 𝜆 = 1 (red dotted–dashed) curve, their unpolarized signal had
large systematics. In part this is because their networks had very large
prediction biases (large 𝜇0 in the middle panel) – they were forced
8
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
Fig. 7. Bootstrapped modulation distributions for a PL2 test data set (0.6 million
simulated tracks with 5000 bootstrap samples). The residual modulation from the
original simulated photoelectron directions are the black histogram, weighted NNs
𝜆 = 1.83 are in red and moment analysis with standard cuts in blue. The solid lines show
the fits of Eq. (20) to these distributions (the fitting also includes the bootstrapping
distribution on 𝜙, not shown here). From these fits we get an estimate of 𝑁eff for
each method to use in the FoM (Eq. (21)). For weighted NN, the result gives a slightly
improved MDP99, as listed in Table 1. (For interpretation of the references to colour
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
to divide out the 𝜃 pattern of these biases to obtain acceptable ∼1%
polarization levels. Our NN ensemble produces negligible bias at these
energies, so we did not have to perform such a normalization, yet our
residual polarization is substantially lower at all energies for the same
number of test tracks.
The bottom panel of Fig. 5 shows the quality of EVPA recovery
for the 100% polarized case. Again NN performance is comparable to
moments in 𝜙 recovery. Both methods have somewhat increased error
at low energy, due to low recovered 𝜇100 and limited counts analyzed
in these energy bins (Eq. (16b)). For 𝜇 ∼ 0, 𝜙 becomes undefined.
To help visualize the reconstruction accuracy, we show the binned
modulation curves for 0% and 100% polarization for two energies
in Fig. 6. Recall that we do not simply fit these histograms to recover
polarization parameters (as in some less sophisticated analyses).
Nevertheless, these are useful to show the lack of bias in our angle
predictions. Some ML polarization analyses suffer from strong prediction
bias, producing imperfect 2𝜋 symmetry and narrow peaks in
the angular distribution, e.g. Moriakov et al. [12]; no such artifacts
are evident in our reconstructions. We can see that the unpolarized
distributions for our NN method are as flat as those for the moments,
but the NNs recover significantly more modulation in the polarized
data.
Fig. 7 shows the bootstrap distributions used to calculate 𝑁eff for
the full importance weighted maximum likelihood method.
Tables 1 and 2 show our FoM results for two power law datasets and
several values of the importance weighting control parameter 𝜆. These
source spectrum power laws PL1 (𝑑𝑁∕𝑑𝐸 = 𝐴𝐸−1), and PL2 (𝑑𝑁∕𝑑𝐸 =
𝐴𝐸−2) extend across the IXPE energy spectrum. They are convolved
with IXPE’s effective area function [36], to provide event energy distributions
expected for real astrophysical sources. We include a moment
analysis weighted by track ellipticities for comparison, although this
analysis is not currently used by IXPE. We compute modulations for
the 2–8 keV events only, with values normalized to 105 events in this
range, as achievable for a moderately bright X-ray source.
In Table 1 optimal 𝜆 weighted NNs outperform the uncut moment
analysis by ∼ 1.25× in this FoM, and by ∼ 1.20× with ellipticity cuts
or ∼ 1.14× with ellipticity weights for both PL2 and PL1 (Tables 1 and
2). NN improvements in PL1 are slightly higher than PL2 since there
are more high energy tracks. Note also that the improvement of our
method comes in 3 parts: an improvement in track angle prediction
(NN > Mom.), an improvement in the track error predictions (NN
w/ weights > Mom. w/ weights) and an improvement from using a
weighted scheme (NN w/ weights > NN, Mom. w/ weights > Mom. w/
cut).
Since (for an unbiased estimator) the FoM is proportional to
𝑁−1∕2
eff ∼ 𝑡−1∕2, the FoM improvement corresponds to a 1-1.22 ≈ 45%
increase in effective exposure time vs. cut moments analysis, or ≈ 30%
if moments weights are employed. The effective area peaks at ∼ 2.5 keV,
greatly favoring low energy tracks in the analyzed data set. Of course
this disfavors our NN analysis which tends to perform best at high
energies, but is conservative and realistic for soft astrophysical sources.
Sources with harder spectra (e.g. highly absorbed AGN or accreting Xray
pulsars) will show even larger NN performance boosts. Note that we
also do not include the events detected outside of the 2 − 8 keV energy
range. A small MDP99 improvement can be expected from inclusion of
the many (poorly measured) low energy events, especially for very soft
sources.
While all results shown here are for simulated tracks, we have
applied this analysis to sample data from real GPD events, and find
similar sensitivity improvements. More extensive comparisons with
individual GPDs will be needed to optimize the analysis.
5.2. Absorption points
Our NN analysis also returns the photon absorption point and
energy. Fig. 8 shows the performance compared with the standard moment
analysis for the localization in terms of root mean squared error
(RMSE). In the standard pipeline, the localization shifts to the event
barycenter (dashed curve) at low energies. It seems that our trained
NN automatically shifts to a similar estimate at low energies as the red
curve is better at all 𝐸. In practice the performance of all methods is
adequate for IXPE imaging; the dotted line shows one quarter of the
mirror half power diameter (HPD). However, the excellent NN photon
localization on the detector can be very helpful in characterizing and
mitigating position-dependent detector effects. We can compare our
recovered absorption point localization HPDs at 2.7, 4.5, 6.4 and 8.0
keV (1.7, 1.6, 1.6, and 1.9 pixels, respectively) to those of Li et al. [37]
(2.3, 3.4, 3.2, 3.7 pixel) and Kitaguchi et al. [19] (1.9, 1.6, 1.5, 1.6),
finding that they compare favorably.
5.3. Energy
For the energy resolution, we find that the NN out-performs moments
for all energies in the IXPE spectrum. Results are shown in Figs. 8
and 9. While we expect that all sources observed by IXPE will have
much higher resolution spectra available (e.g. from CCD data), this
energy improvement can help in isolating polarization signatures to
narrow spectra features, e.g. the Fe K𝛼 line. Further simulation with
real astronomical spectra are needed to see if such line affects are
within IXPE’s reach.
6. Summary and discussion
We have developed a state-of-the-art track reconstruction and polarization
prediction framework for imaging X-ray polarimeters. We
reconstruct X-ray photon track angles, absorption points and energies
using deep ensembles; predictive errors in track angle are used to inform
a weighted maximum likelihood estimation of source polarization
parameters. We define a new FoM for polarization recovery, using
bootstrap error distributions, which allows us to compare, on equal
footing, our method with the IXPE project’s current moment analysis,
including cuts to the data sets and weights from the reconstruction
quality measurements. We have tested our method with simulated and
real detector data. On simple simulated power law spectra, our analysis
implies that the increases to IXPE’s polarization sensitivity provided by
this method can increase the effective exposures by as much as ∼ 45%.
Preliminary results suggest improvements on real data are similar.
9
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
Fig. 8. Left: Photon absorption point localization. The NN analysis (red) does appreciably better than the moments analysis and matches the barycenter estimate at the lowest
energies. All methods are adequate, as localization is much better than the size of the point source image produced by IXPE’s mirrors. Right: Fractional width of the event energy
estimate. The distributions are measured with the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) statistic, which is less sensitive to the long tail from partial tracks (see Fig. 9). Values are
converted as FWHM = 3.46MAD, appropriate for a Gaussian peak. The NN analysis does slightly better than the standard PI count summing, especially at high energy. The
theoretical resolution limit for the GPD Fano factor is shown by the dotted line. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)
Fig. 9. Left: Recovered energy distributions. The main peak is slightly higher (smaller FWHM) for NN estimates, while the low energy tail of window/GEMS conversion partial
tracks is somewhat suppressed.
Further verification with real X-ray calibration data sets is needed
before this method can be applied to flight data. The networks would
also need to be tuned, with calibration data, for the peculiarities of
each flight detector. Of course the weighting scheme should be tuned
for individual source spectra. Indeed, considering variation in Fig. 4 the
optimal weighting will be an energy dependent 𝜆(𝐸𝑖). The method that
we present here is general and may offer even larger gains for future
missions with larger effective areas and higher spatial resolution from
tighter mirror PSFs, such as eXTP and future proposed electron tracking
polarization projects.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
A.L. Peirson: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing -
original draft, Formal analysis, Visualization. R.W. Romani: Supervision,
Validation, Writing - original draft, Conceptualization, Resources.
H.L. Marshall: Project administration, Writing - review & editing,
Resources. J.F. Steiner: Writing - review & editing, Investigation. L.
Baldini: Writing - review & editing, Software.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Bruce Tidor and Kevin Shi of MIT for
early efforts related to this project and Marius Tirlea for discussions
on statistical models. We would also like to thank the NASA FINESST,
United States of America grant 80NSSC19K1407 and NASA, United
States of America grant NNM17AA26C for supporting this work. The
Italian contribution to IXPE is supported by the Italian Space Agency
through the agreement ASI-INFN n.2017-13-H.O. Funding for this work
was provided in part by contract 80MSFC17C0012 from the Marshall
Space Flight Center (MSFC), United States to MIT in support of IXPE,
a NASA Astrophysics Small Explorers mission.
References
[1] H. Krawczynski, G. Matt, A.R. Ingram, R. Taverna, R. Turolla, F. Kislat, C.C.T.
Cheung, A. Bykov, K. Sinha, H. Zhang, J. Heyl, N. Bucciantini, G. Madejski,
T. Kallman, K.M. Jahoda, Q. Abarr, M.G. Baring, L. Baldini, M. Begelman, M.
Böttcher, E. Cackett, I. Caiazzo, P. Coppi, E. Costa, J. Dexter, J.-F. Fortin, C.
Gammie, J.A. Gaskin, D. Giannios, P. Ghosh, A.K. Harding, D.H. Hartmann, K.
Hayashida, S.G. Jorstad, P. Kaaret, T. Kitaguchi, L. Latronico, T. Maccarone,
A. Marscher, H. Marshall, M. McConnell, J.M. Miller, S.L. O’Dell, F. Özel, T.
Okajima, M. Pearce, J. Perkins, B.D. Ramsey, R.W. Romani, J.D. Schnittman,
C. Sgro, P. Soffitta, H. Takahashi, T. Tamagawa, J. Tomsick, M.C. Weisskopf, G.
Younes, Using X-ray polarimetry to probe the physics of black holes and neutron
stars, 51, 2019, p. 150, Conference Name: Bulletin of the American Astronomical
Society.
[2] M.C. Weisskopf, G.G. Cohen, H.L. Kestenbaum, K.S. Long, R. Novick, R.S. Wolff,
Measurement of the X-ray polarization of the Crab Nebula, Astrophys. J. Lett.
(ISSN: 0004-637X) 208 (1976) L125–L128, http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/182247.
10
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
[3] E. Costa, P. Soffitta, R. Bellazzini, A. Brez, N. Lumb, G. Spandre, An efficient
photoelectric X-ray polarimeter for the study of black holes and neutron stars,
Nature (ISSN: 0028-0836) 411 (2001) 662–665.
[4] R. Bellazzini, G. Spandre, M. Minuti, L. Baldini, A. Brez, L. Latronico, N. Omodei,
M. Razzano, M.M. Massai, M. Pesce-Rollins, C. Sgró, E. Costa, P. Soffitta, H.
Sipila, E. Lempinen, A sealed gas pixel detector for X-ray astronomy, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A (ISSN: 0168-9002) 579 (2007) 853–858, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2007.05.304.
[5] H. Feng, R. Bellazzini, The X-ray polarimetry window reopens, Nat. Astronom.
(ISSN: 2397-3366) 4 (5) (2020) 547, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-
1103-6, Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[6] C. Sgrò, IXPE Team, The imaging X-ray polarimetry explorer (IXPE), Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A (ISSN: 0168-9002) 936 (2019) 212–215, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2018.10.111.
[7] S.N. Zhang, M. Feroci, A. Santangelo, Y.W. Dong, H. Feng, F.J. Lu, K. Nandra,
Z.S. Wang, S. Zhang, E. Bozzo, S. Brandt, A.D. Rosa, L.J. Gou, M. Hernanz,
M.v.d. Klis, X.D. Li, Y. Liu, P. Orleanski, G. Pareschi, M. Pohl, J. Poutanen, J.L.
Qu, S. Schanne, L. Stella, P. Uttley, A. Watts, R.X. Xu, W.F. Yu, J.J.M.i.t. Zand,
S. Zane, L. Alvarez, L. Amati, L. Baldini, C. Bambi, S. Basso, S. Bhattacharyya,
R. Bellazzini, T. Belloni, P. Bellutti, S. Bianchi, A. Brez, M. Bursa, V. Burwitz,
C. Budtz-Jørgensen, I. Caiazzo, R. Campana, X.L. Cao, P. Casella, C.Y. Chen, L.
Chen, T. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y.P. Chen, M. Civitani, F.C. Zelati, W. Cui, W.W.
Cui, Z.G. Dai, E.D. Monte, D.d. Martino, S.D. Cosimo, S. Diebold, M. Dovciak, I.
Donnarumma, V. Doroshenko, P. Esposito, Y. Evangelista, Y. Favre, P. Friedrich,
F. Fuschino, J.L. Galvez, Z.L. Gao, M.Y. Ge, O. Gevin, D. Goetz, D.W. Han, J.
Heyl, J. Horak, W. Hu, F. Huang, Q.S. Huang, R. Hudec, D. Huppenkothen,
G.L. Israel, A. Ingram, V. Karas, D. Karelin, P.A. Jenke, L. Ji, S. Korpela, D.
Kunneriath, C. Labanti, G. Li, X. Li, Z.S. Li, E.W. Liang, O. Limousin, L. Lin,
Z.X. Ling, H.B. Liu, H.W. Liu, Z. Liu, B. Lu, N. Lund, D. Lai, B. Luo, T. Luo, B.
Ma, S. Mahmoodifar, M. Marisaldi, A. Martindale, N. Meidinger, Y.P. Men, M.
Michalska, R. Mignani, M. Minuti, S. Motta, F. Muleri, J. Neilsen, M. Orlandini,
A.T. Pan, A. Patruno, E. Perinati, A. Picciotto, C. Piemonte, M. Pinchera, A.
Rachevski, M. Rapisarda, N. Rea, E.M.R. Rossi, A. Rubini, G. Sala, X.W. Shu, C.
Sgro, Z.X. Shen, P. Soffitta, L.M. Song, G. Spandre, G. Stratta, T.E. Strohmayer,
L. Sun, J. Svoboda, G. Tagliaferri, C. Tenzer, T. Hong, R. Taverna, G. Torok,
R. Turolla, S. Vacchi, J. Wang, D. Walton, K. Wang, J.F. Wang, R.J. Wang,
Y.F. Wang, S.S. Weng, J. Wilms, B. Winter, X. Wu, X.F. Wu, S.L. Xiong, Y.P.
Xu, Y.Q. Xue, Z. Yan, S. Yang, X. Yang, Y.J. Yang, F. Yuan, W.M. Yuan, Y.F.
Yuan, G. Zampa, N. Zampa, A. Zdziarski, C. Zhang, C.L. Zhang, L. Zhang, X.
Zhang, Z. Zhang, W.D. Zhang, S.J. Zheng, P. Zhou, X.L. Zhou, eXTP: Enhanced
X-ray timing and polarization mission, in: Space Telescopes and Instrumentation
2016: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Vol. 9905, International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 2017, p. 99051Q, http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2232034.
[8] M. Weisskopf, An overview of X-ray polarimetry of astronomical sources,
Galaxies 6 (2018) 33, http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/galaxies6010033.
[9] S.L. O’Dell, L. Baldini, R. Bellazzini, E. Costa, R.F. Elsner, V.M. Kaspi, J.J.
Kolodziejczak, L. Latronico, H.L. Marshall, G. Matt, F. Mulieri, B.D. Ramsey,
R.W. Romani, P. Soffitta, A.F. Tennant, M.C. Weisskopf, D.Z. Allen, F. Amici,
S. Antoniak, P. Attina, M. Bachetti, M. Barbanera, W.H. Baumgartner, J. Bladt,
S.D. Bongiorno, F. Borotto, T. Brooks, S. Bussinger, H.K. Bygott, E. Cavazzuti,
M. Ceccanti, S. Citraro, W.D. Deininger, E. Del Monte, K.L. Dietz, N. Di Lalla, G.
Di Persio, I. Donnarumma, J. Erickson, Y. Evangelista, S. Fabiani, R. Ferrazzoli,
M. Foster, M. Giusti, S. Gunji, L. Guy, S. Johnson, W. Kalinowski, A.R. Kelley,
K. Kilaru, C. Lefevre, S. Maldera, A. Manfreda, M. Marengo, J. Masciarelli, M.
McEachen, P. Mereu, M. Minuti, M.A. Mitchell, S. Mitchell, I. Mitsuishi, A.
Morbidini, F. Mosti, H. Nasimi, B. Negri, L. Orsini, D. Osborne, S.D. Pavelitz,
C. Pentz, M. Perri, M. Pesce-Rollins, C. Peterson, R. Piazzolla, S. Pieraccini,
M. Pilia, M. Pinchera, S. Puccetti, J. Ranganathan, T. Read, A. Rubini, F.
Santoli, P. Sarra, S. Schindhelm, A. Sciortino, C. Seckar, C. Sgrò, B.T. Smith,
C.O. Speegle, T. Tamagawa, M. Tardiola, A. Tobia, A. Tortosa, A. Trois, B.
Weddendorf, J. Wedmore, D. Zanetti, The imaging X-ray polarimetry explorer
(IXPE): technical overview, 0699, 2018, p. 106991X, http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/
12.2314146, Conference Name: Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2018:
Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray.
[10] F. Muleri, P. Soffitta, L. Baldini, R. Bellazzini, A. Brez, E. Costa, S. Fabiani, F.
Krummenacher, L. Latronico, F. Lazzarotto, M. Minuti, M. Pinchera, A. Rubini,
C. Sgró, G. Spandre, Spectral and polarimetric characterization of the Gas
Pixel Detector filled with dimethyl ether, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A
(ISSN: 0168-9002) 620 (2010) 285–293, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2010.
03.006.
[11] R. Bellazzini, F. Angelini, L. Baldini, A. Brez, E. Costa, G.D. Persio, L. Latronico,
M.M. Massai, N. Omodei, L. Pacciani, P. Soffitta, G. Spandre, Novel gaseous
x-ray polarimeter: data analysis and simulation, in: Polarimetry in Astronomy,
Vol. 4843, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2003, pp. 383–393,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.459381.
[12] N. Moriakov, A. Samudre, M. Negro, F. Gieseke, S. Otten, L. Hendriks, Inferring
astrophysical X-ray polarization with deep learning, 2020, arXiv:2005.08126
[astro-ph].
[13] A. Graves, S. Fernández, F. Gomez, J. Schmidhuber, Connectionist temporal classification:
labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks,
in: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
’06, Association for Computing Machinery, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, ISBN:
978-1-59593-383-6, 2006, pp. 369–376, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1143844.
1143891.
[14] T. Young, D. Hazarika, S. Poria, E. Cambria, Recent trends in deep learning
based natural language processing, 2018, arXiv:1708.02709 [cs].
[15] B. Tang, Z. Pan, K. Yin, A. Khateeb, Recent advances of deep learning in
bioinformatics and computational biology, Front. Genet. (ISSN: 1664-8021) 10
(2019) http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2019.00214, Publisher: Frontiers.
[16] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G.E. Hinton, Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks, in: F. Pereira, C.J.C. Burges, L. Bottou, K.Q.
Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25,
Curran Associates, Inc., 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[17] A. Brill, Q. Feng, T.B. Humensky, B. Kim, D. Nieto, T. Miener, Investigating a
deep learning method to analyze images from multiple gamma-ray telescopes,
in: 2019 New York Scientific Data Summit, NYSDS, 2019, pp. 1–4, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/NYSDS.2019.8909697, arXiv:2001.03602.
[18] N. Choma, F. Monti, L. Gerhardt, T. Palczewski, Z. Ronaghi, Prabhat, W. Bhimji,
M.M. Bronstein, S.R. Klein, J. Bruna, Graph neural networks for IceCube signal
classification, 2018, arXiv:1809.06166 [astro-ph, stat].
[19] T. Kitaguchi, K. Black, T. Enoto, A. Hayato, J.E. Hill, W.B. Iwakiri, P. Kaaret,
T. Mizuno, T. Tamagawa, A convolutional neural network approach for reconstructing
polarization information of photoelectric X-ray polarimeters, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A (ISSN: 01689002) 942 (2019) 162389, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2019.162389, arXiv:1907.06442.
[20] T. Tamagawa, PRAXyS Team, X-ray polarimetry mission PRAXyS, 2017, p. 305.
[21] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, C. Blundell, Simple and scalable predictive
uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles, in: Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17, Curran
Associates Inc., Long Beach, California, USA, ISBN: 978-1-5108-6096-4, 2017,
pp. 6405–6416.
[22] B. Efron, R.J. Tibshirani, An Introduction to the Bootstrap, CRC Press, ISBN:
978-0-412-04231-7, 1994, Google-Books-ID: gLlpIUxRntoC.
[23] S. Fort, H. Hu, B. Lakshminarayanan, Deep ensembles: A loss landscape
perspective, 2019, arXiv:1912.02757 [cs, stat].
[24] Y. Ovadia, E. Fertig, J. Ren, Z. Nado, D. Sculley, S. Nowozin, J.V. Dillon, B.
Lakshminarayanan, J. Snoek, Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? Evaluating
predictive uncertainty under dataset shift, 2019, arXiv:1906.02530 [cs, stat].
[25] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, What uncertainties do we need in Bayesian deep learning for
computer vision? in: I. Guyon, U.V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30, Curran Associates, Inc., 2017, pp. 5574–5584.
[26] C. Steppa, T.L. Holch, HexagDLy - Processing hexagonally sampled data with
CNNs in PyTorch, SoftwareX (ISSN: 23527110) 9 (2019) 193–198, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2019.02.010, arXiv:1903.01814.
[27] S. Agostinelli, J. Allison, K. Amako, J. Apostolakis, H. Araujo, P. Arce, M. Asai,
D. Axen, S. Banerjee, G. Barrand, F. Behner, L. Bellagamba, J. Boudreau, L.
Broglia, A. Brunengo, H. Burkhardt, S. Chauvie, J. Chuma, R. Chytracek, G.
Cooperman, G. Cosmo, P. Degtyarenko, A. Dell’Acqua, G. Depaola, D. Dietrich,
R. Enami, A. Feliciello, C. Ferguson, H. Fesefeldt, G. Folger, F. Foppiano, A. Forti,
S. Garelli, S. Giani, R. Giannitrapani, D. Gibin, J.J. Gómez Cadenas, I. González,
G. Gracia Abril, G. Greeniaus, W. Greiner, V. Grichine, A. Grossheim, S. Guatelli,
P. Gumplinger, R. Hamatsu, K. Hashimoto, H. Hasui, A. Heikkinen, A. Howard, V.
Ivanchenko, A. Johnson, F.W. Jones, J. Kallenbach, N. Kanaya, M. Kawabata, Y.
Kawabata, M. Kawaguti, S. Kelner, P. Kent, A. Kimura, T. Kodama, R. Kokoulin,
M. Kossov, H. Kurashige, E. Lamanna, T. Lampén, V. Lara, V. Lefebure, F.
Lei, M. Liendl, W. Lockman, F. Longo, S. Magni, M. Maire, E. Medernach, K.
Minamimoto, P. Mora de Freitas, Y. Morita, K. Murakami, M. Nagamatu, R.
Nartallo, P. Nieminen, T. Nishimura, K. Ohtsubo, M. Okamura, S. O’Neale, Y.
Oohata, K. Paech, J. Perl, A. Pfeiffer, M.G. Pia, F. Ranjard, A. Rybin, S. Sadilov,
E. Di Salvo, G. Santin, T. Sasaki, N. Savvas, Y. Sawada, S. Scherer, S. Sei, V.
Sirotenko, D. Smith, N. Starkov, H. Stoecker, J. Sulkimo, M. Takahata, S. Tanaka,
E. Tcherniaev, E. Safai Tehrani, M. Tropeano, P. Truscott, H. Uno, L. Urban, P.
Urban, M. Verderi, A. Walkden, W. Wander, H. Weber, J.P. Wellisch, T. Wenaus,
D.C. Williams, D. Wright, T. Yamada, H. Yoshida, D. Zschiesche, Geant4—a
simulation toolkit, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A (ISSN: 0168-9002) 506
(3) (2003) 250–303, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9002(03)01368-8.
[28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition,
2015, arXiv:1512.03385 [cs].
[29] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. van der Maaten, K.Q. Weinberger, Densely connected
convolutional networks, 2018, arXiv:1608.06993 [cs].
[30] I. Sutskever, J. Martens, G. Dahl, G. Hinton, On the importance of initialization
and momentum in deep learning, in: Proceedings of the 30th International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 28,
ICML’13, JMLR.org, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2013, pp. III–1139–III–1147.
[31] F. Kislat, B. Clark, M. Beilicke, H. Krawczynski, Analyzing the data from Xray
polarimeters with Stokes parameters, Astropart. Phys. (ISSN: 0927-6505) 68
(2015) 45–51, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.astropartphys.2015.02.007.
11
A.L. Peirson, R.W. Romani, H.L. Marshall et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 986 (2021) 164740
[32] N. Karampatziakis, J. Langford, Online importance weight aware updates, in:
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence, UAI’11, AUAI Press, Barcelona, Spain, ISBN: 978-0-9749039-7-2,
2011, pp. 392–399.
[33] F. Hu, J.V. Zidek, The weighted likelihood, Canad. J. Statist. (ISSN: 1708-945X)
30 (3) (2002) 347–371, http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3316141.
[34] A. Wächter, L.T. Biegler, On the implementation of an interior-point filter linesearch
algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming, Math. Program. (ISSN:
1436-4646) 106 (1) (2006) 25–57, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10107-004-0559-
y.
[35] M.C. Weisskopf, R.F. Elsner, S.L. O’Dell, On understanding the figures of merit
for detection and measurement of x-ray polarization, 2010, 77320E, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1117/12.857357, arXiv:1006.3711 [astro-ph].
[36] M.C. Weisskopf, B. Ramsey, S.L. O’Dell, A. Tennant, R. Elsner, P. Soffita, R.
Bellazzini, E. Costa, J. Kolodziejczak, V. Kaspi, F. Mulieri, H. Marshall, G. Matt,
R. Romani, The imaging X-ray polarimetry explorer (IXPE), Results Phys. (ISSN:
2211-3797) 6 (2016) 1179–1180, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rinp.2016.10.021.
[37] T. Li, M. Zeng, H. Feng, J. Cang, H. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Zeng, J. Cheng, H. Ma,
Y. Liu, Electron track reconstruction and improved modulation for photoelectric
X-ray polarimetry, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A (ISSN: 01689002) 858
(2017) 62–68, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2017.03.050, arXiv:1611.07244.
12