Global Perspectives on
Health Assessments for
an Aging Population
Luis Vieira Ribeiro
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela Magalhães Ribeiro
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
A volume in the Advances in Medical Diagnosis,
Treatment, and Care (AMDTC) Book Series
Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Medical Information Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA, USA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax: 717-533-8661
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2023 by IGI Global. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or distributed in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the names of the products or
companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the trademark or registered trademark.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in this book are those of the
authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com.
Names: Ribeiro, Luís Vieira, 1974- editor. | Ribeiro, Anabela Magalhães,
1972- editor.
Title: Global perspectives on health assessments for an aging population /
edited by Luís Vieira Ribeiro and Anabela Magalhães Ribeiro.
Description: Hershey PA : Medical Information Science Reference, [2023]. |
Includes bibliographical references and index. | Summary: “Global
Perspectives on Health Assessments for an Aging Population provides
relevant theoretical frameworks and the latest empirical research
findings in the area of health assessments for an aging population.
Covering topics such as ambulatory wellbeing, gerontology, and
neuropsychological assessment, this premier reference source is a
valuable resource for gerontological healthcare professionals,
gerontological social workers, psychologists, students and educators of
higher education, researchers, and academicians”-- Provided by
publisher.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023002843 (print) | LCCN 2023002844 (ebook) | ISBN
9781668476307 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781668476314 (ebook)
Subjects: MESH: Geriatric Assessment--methods | Aging | Neuropsychological
Tests
Classification: LCC RA777.6 (print) | LCC RA777.6 (ebook) | NLM WT 101 |
DDC 613/.0438--dc23/eng/20230313
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023002843
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023002844
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Medical Diagnosis, Treatment, and Care (AMDTC)
(ISSN: 2475-6628; eISSN: 2475-6636)
Advances in Medical Diagnosis,
Treatment, and Care (AMDTC)
Book Series
Advancements in medicine have prolonged the life expectancy of individuals all over the world. Once
life-threatening conditions have become significantly easier to treat and even cure in many cases. Continued
research in the medical field will further improve the quality of life, longevity, and wellbeing of
individuals.
The Advances in Medical Diagnosis, Treatment, and Care (AMDTC) book series seeks to highlight
publications on innovative treatment methodologies, diagnosis tools and techniques, and best practices
for patient care. Comprised of comprehensive resources aimed to assist professionals in the medical
field apply the latest innovations in the identification and management of medical conditions as well as
patient care and interaction, the books within the AMDTC series are relevant to the research and practical
needs of medical practitioners, researchers, students, and hospital administrators.
Mission
ISSN:2475-6628
EISSN:2475-6636
• Patient Interaction
• Patient-Centered Care
• Cancer Treatment
• Chronic Conditions
• Medical Procedures
• Experimental Medicine
• Emergency Medicine
• Disease Prevention
• Critical Care
• Disease Management
Coverage
IGI Global is currently accepting manuscripts
for publication within this series. To submit a proposal
for a volume in this series, please contact our
Acquisition Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com
or visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
The Advances in Medical Diagnosis, Treatment, and Care (AMDTC) Book Series (ISSN 2475-6628) is published by IGI Global, 701 E.
Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This series is composed of titles available for purchase individually;
each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title within the series. For pricing and ordering information please visit http://
www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-medical-diagnosis-treatment-care/129618. Postmaster: Send all address changes to above address.
Copyright © 2023 IGI Global. All rights, including translation in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series may be
reproduced or used in any form or by any means – graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information
and retrieval systems – without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including classroom
teaching purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.
Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-medical-diagnosistreatment-
care/129618
Cannabis sativa Cultivation, Production, and Applications in Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics
Rafiq Lone (Central University of Kashmir, India) Aabid Hussain Mir (University of Kashmir, India) and Javid
Manzoor (Jiwaji Universit, India)
Engineering Science Reference • © 2023 • 227pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668457184) • US $250.00
Medical Cannabis and the Effects of Cannabinoids on Fighting Cancer, Multiple Sclerosis, Epilepsy, Parkinson’s,
and Other Neurodegenerative Diseases
Rana R. Zeine (Kean University, USA) and Brian W. Teasdale (Kean University, USA)
Medical Information Science Reference • © 2023 • 406pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668456521) • US $345.00
Perspectives on Coping Strategies for Menstrual and Premenstrual Distress
B.S. Parimal (The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, India) and Kavita Gupta (The Maharaja Sayajirao
University of Baroda, India)
Medical Information Science Reference • © 2023 • 344pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668450888) • US $325.00
Pharmacological Benefits of Natural Agents
Narayanaswamy Radhakrishnan (St. Peter’s Institute of Higher Education and Research (SPIHER), India) Srinivasan
Vasantha (St. Peter’s Institute of Higher Education and Research (SPIHER), India) and Ashok Kumar Pandurangan
(B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and Technology, India)
Medical Information Science Reference • © 2023 • 335pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668467374) • US $325.00
Cases on Multimorbidity and Its Impact on Elderly Patients
Adil Hamad Alharthi (King Fahad Armed Forces Hospital, Saudi Arabia)
Medical Information Science Reference • © 2023 • 300pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668423547) • US $325.00
Handbook of Research on Advanced Phytochemicals and Plant-Based Drug Discovery
Ajeet Singh (ICAR-Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research, India)
Medical Information Science Reference • © 2022 • 722pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668451298) • US $545.00
AI Applications for Disease Diagnosis and Treatment
Rajae El Ouazzani (Moulay Ismail University of Meknes, Morocco) Mohammed Fattah (Moulay Ismail University
of Meknes, Morocco) and Nabil Benamar (Moulay Ismail University of Meknes, Morocco)
Medical Information Science Reference • © 2022 • 332pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781668423042) • US $435.00
701 East Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033, USA
Tel: 717-533-8845 x100 • Fax: 717-533-8661
E-Mail: cust@igi-global.com • www.igi-global.com
﻿
Table of Contents
Preface................................................................................................................................................... xv
Section 1
Assessment of the Health and Functioning of the Elderly
Chapter 1
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health..................................................... 1
Heidi-Tuulia Eklund, University of Jyväskylä, Finland
Patrik Eklund, Umea University, Sweden
Chapter 2
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values........................................... 13
Patrik Eklund, Umea University, Sweden
Chapter 3
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults: A Review Based on Upto-
Date Knowledge................................................................................................................................ 21
Vaitsa Giannouli, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Chapter 4
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health................................................ 48
Ana Paula Fontes, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela de Magalhães Ribeiro, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal &
University Hospital Center of Algarve, Portugal
Luís Pedro Ribeiro, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Section 2
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention: Intervention and Implications
Chapter 5
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing: A Comprehensive Framework for Enhancing Reminiscence in
the Elderly.............................................................................................................................................. 71
Aastha Dhingra, SGT University, India
Waheeda Khan, SGT University, India
﻿
Chapter 6
Physical Activity Programs for Older People: Methodological Approach and Practical Implications.82
Gonçalo Dias, Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Rui Sousa Mendes, Coimbra School of Education, Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Rodrigo Mendes, University of Coimbra, Portugal
Cristiana Lameira, Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Luis Pedro Ribeiro, University of Algarve, Portugal
Chapter 7
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly: A Scoping Review............. 103
Tânia Martins Gonçalves, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria da Conceição Farinha, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Cristina Marques-Vieira, Nursing School, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Portugal
Maria Augusta Ferreira, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria Adelaide Paiva, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria do Céu Neves, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Chapter 8
Ambulatory Wellbeing: Perspectives on Senescence in Gerontology................................................. 116
Catherine Hayes, University of Sunderland, UK
Chapter 9
Preventing Falls: Emphasizing Education to Support Older Person Active Ageing........................... 137
Marja Äijö, Savonia University of Applied Sciences, Kuopio, Finland
Amanda M. Clifford, Ageing Research Centre, Health Research Institute, University of
Limerick, Ireland
Irene O’Byrne Maguire, National Treasury Management Agency, Ireland
Section 3
Treatment, Monitoring, and Satisfaction of the Elderly
Chapter 10
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease: A
Scoping Review................................................................................................................................... 157
Tânia Martins Gonçalves, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria da Conceição Farinha, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Cristina Marques-Vieira, Nursing School, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Portugal
Maria Augusta Gomes Alves Ferreira, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria Adelaide Paiva, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria do Céu Neves, Higher School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Chapter 11
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare: A Cognitive Ability Testing Guide.......... 170
Aikaterini Christogianni, Loughborough University, UK
﻿
Chapter 12
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction After Total Knee
Arthroplasty: A Study Based on a Classification and Regression Tree............................................... 192
Ana Paula Fontes, University of Algarve, Portugal
Ana Marreiros, University of Algarve, Portugal
Marina Gueorguieva Kovatchki, University of Algarve, Portugal
Nuno César Barbosa, Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
Daniel Bernardino, Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
Acácio Ramos, Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
João Paulo Sousa, Algarve Private Hospital, Portugal
Chapter 13
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare: A Systematic Literature Review................... 211
Hawa A. Zanzeh, Social Organization, Ghana
Luis Pedro Ribeiro, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela Magalhães Ribeiro, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal & University
Hospital Center of Algarve, Portugal
Helena Almeida, University of Algarve, Portugal
Chapter 14
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration......................................................... 231
Joel Guerreiro, Universidade do Algarve, Portugal
Section 4
Elderly Care Differences and Protection Policies
Chapter 15
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia: Different Cultures, Same Goal................................ 249
Carla Piscarreta Damásio, Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology, School of
Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria, Portugal
Gordana Ristevska Dimitrovska, Higher Medical School, University St. Kliment Ohridski
Bitola, North Macedonia
Chapter 16
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging............................. 284
Carmen Macedo, University of Algarve, Portugal
Compilation of References................................................................................................................ 305
About the Contributors..................................................................................................................... 363
Index.................................................................................................................................................... 369
﻿
Detailed Table of Contents
﻿
Preface................................................................................................................................................... xv
Section 1
Assessment of the Health and Functioning of the Elderly
This section encompasses matters related to the scales and instruments used in health that are fractured
in the results presented by different authors due to their inappropriate use.
Chapter 1
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health..................................................... 1
Heidi-Tuulia Eklund, University of Jyväskylä, Finland
Patrik Eklund, Umea University, Sweden
In this chapter the authors compare assessment techniques in education and health. These examples are
drawn from assessment for learning in secondary school as compared with assessment of functioning in
care of older people. Content in these respective assessment environments is obviously quite different,
but there is some overlap, in particular related to social circumstances. The authors further argue that
the assessment structure and formal analysis techniques are and even should be quite similar. These two
domains of assessments share not only a common information and terminological structure, but also a
common assessment framework (CAF) which is shown to be extendable by process detail. In this focus
on assessment in health, particularly in active and healthy ageing, the model is intended to support the
integration of information and processes (decision and intervention pathways) supporting various types
of providers.
Chapter 2
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values........................................... 13
Patrik Eklund, Umea University, Sweden
This chapter shows how assessment values often are viewed as part of a numeric scale, where in fact the
fact values are understood more as symbolic in an ordinary scale. Computing with numeric and symbolic
values is different, and challenging in particular if and when computations have to be intertwined.
Computing with numeric values involves traditional applied and numerical mathematics, whereas
computing with symbolic values involves logic and algebra. In this chapter the authors illuminate these
aspects using examples from classification of functioning.
﻿
Chapter 3
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults: A Review Based on Upto-
Date Knowledge................................................................................................................................ 21
Vaitsa Giannouli, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Financial capacity and financial exploitation assessment in older adults is a topic of debate in modern
societies, given the economic, medical, legal, and ethical implications. Healthcare professionals, legal
professionals, older individuals (healthy as well as patients suffering from neurocognitive disorders),
family members/informal and/or formal caregivers, and the state are all involved in this complex process.
This chapter explores the theoretical models on which relevant neuropsychological instruments have been
proposed and are used in different cultural settings. In addition to that, factors that can predict financial
capacity performance are presented and an attempt is made to propose relevant assessment protocols by
taking into consideration up-to-to-date knowledge on this topic.
Chapter 4
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health................................................ 48
Ana Paula Fontes, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela de Magalhães Ribeiro, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal &
University Hospital Center of Algarve, Portugal
Luís Pedro Ribeiro, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
The studies about the functioning of the elderly play an important role on what the present knowledge
of the demography in the world is. The conceptual aspects of functioning according to WHO and
operated by the international classification of functioning (ICF), have been insufficiently addressed
concerning its adequate applicability in most countries, hindering the contributions of its operation.
The ICF operationalizes a new paradigm of the concepts of functionality/disability, but also in relation
to the concepts of health/illness, quality of life and well-being; where social skills, personal skills and
physical capacity are emphasized, in a multidirectional and dynamic way, where all its components
interact equitably with each other. The authors reflect on the contributions that the ICF can make to the
organizational, legislative, and structural needs in terms of aging.
Section 2
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention: Intervention and Implications
The importance of the education of the elderly is highlighted through an individual physical exercise
program using everyday objects and equine-assisted therapy programs to promote wellbeing and prevent
falls.
Chapter 5
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing: A Comprehensive Framework for Enhancing Reminiscence in
the Elderly.............................................................................................................................................. 71
Aastha Dhingra, SGT University, India
Waheeda Khan, SGT University, India
This chapter examines the effectiveness of the PERMA model of wellbeing in enhancing reminiscence in
elderly individuals. Reminiscence is a process of recollecting past experiences, events, and memories, and
it is commonly used as a therapeutic intervention to promote wellbeing in the elderly. The PERMA model
integrates positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment to enhance overall
﻿
wellbeing. This chapter focuses on how the model can promote reminiscence and improve psychological
wellbeing, social connectedness, and reduce depression and anxiety. The PERMA Model was chosen
for its holistic approach and positive effects on the elderly population. It is important to incorporate the
PERMA model in enhancing reminiscence and to promote positive aging and enhance quality of life.
Chapter 6
Physical Activity Programs for Older People: Methodological Approach and Practical Implications.82
Gonçalo Dias, Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Rui Sousa Mendes, Coimbra School of Education, Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Rodrigo Mendes, University of Coimbra, Portugal
Cristiana Lameira, Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Luis Pedro Ribeiro, University of Algarve, Portugal
To provide a physical activity (PA) program for older people, capable of offering lasting psychomotor
benefits, it is necessary to prescribe exercises directed to their real needs. Moreover, to improve the quality
of life of ageing people, it is important to apply an appropriate PA methodology in terms of intensity,
volume, frequency, and progression, minimizing the physiological aspects that may be affected, such as
cardiorespiratory function, among others. This chapter’s main objective is to present a PA program for
older people, which can be carried out with very simple materials and is accessible to any elderly person,
being structured in three distinct phases. The first phase encompasses joint and organic mobilization. The
second includes the fundamental part of the physical exercises and activities to be carried out. Finally, the
third “return to calm” part, where some stretching exercises are proposed, so that participants gradually
recover from the positive effects of the PA session and reflect on it.
Chapter 7
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly: A Scoping Review............. 103
Tânia Martins Gonçalves, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria da Conceição Farinha, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Cristina Marques-Vieira, Nursing School, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Portugal
Maria Augusta Ferreira, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria Adelaide Paiva, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria do Céu Neves, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Considering the age-related physiological and pathological changes, it´s relevant to analyze the scientific
production regarding the contributions of equine-assisted therapy (EAT) to the health of elderly people
(EP). This scoping review followed the JBI methodology, according to the PCC method. EAT has
had benefits in healthy EP: increasing trunk neuromuscular activation, balance, flexibility, agility, and
coordination. In Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, it’s associated with an improvement in predictive fall risk
factors. It´s also associated with reduced spasticity and improved mental well-being in EP with spinal
cord injury. In arthritis, a decrease the intensity and frequency of pain and increase of range of motion.
Regarding mental health, EAT increases psychological stability, social stimulation, relaxation, and the
evocation of positive memories. In post-traumatic stress disorder, it can increase a sense of self-security.
Concomitantly, it may be associated with an improvement of EP memory. The integration of EAT into
therapeutic plans for EP should be considered by health professionals.
﻿
Chapter 8
Ambulatory Wellbeing: Perspectives on Senescence in Gerontology................................................. 116
Catherine Hayes, University of Sunderland, UK
Being able to theoretically underpin the gerontology of ageing is a fundamental part of designing and
constructing bespoke research and care interventions for the exploration of falls prevention in practice.
Within the context of home care and community-based settings, being able to integrate falls prevention
into the integrated care that older people receive, their ambulation, health and wellbeing, and subsequently
their longevity in senior years can be extended and sustained in terms of quality and satisfaction. This
chapter contextualizes and frames falls and fall injuries as a societal challenge by deconstructing the
characteristic physiological processes of senescence and identifying key areas for fundamental address
in the prevention of falls ‘in situ.’ The chapter focus is predominantly aligned to those processes of
natural senescence aligned with normal ageing processes, alongside those pathologies which constitute
abnormal pathological processes, which occur more often in older adults as a consequence of these
processes of senescence.
Chapter 9
Preventing Falls: Emphasizing Education to Support Older Person Active Ageing........................... 137
Marja Äijö, Savonia University of Applied Sciences, Kuopio, Finland
Amanda M. Clifford, Ageing Research Centre, Health Research Institute, University of
Limerick, Ireland
Irene O’Byrne Maguire, National Treasury Management Agency, Ireland
Falls can have harmful physical and psychosocial consequences that affect the activity, socialization,
and quality of life of older adults. Falls prevention education (FPE) is critical to prevent falls among
older people. FPE is required for all key stakeholders, including older people health care professionals
and students, as well as other professionals who work with or offer services for older people. This is
especially important to ensure the quality of services in health care sector in home services, hospitals,
and residential settings. The FPE contents are extensive and need to be tailored to who is being trained
and where. FPE is important because it informs prevention and management, hence supports older
people with and without injuries to have an active and healthy life. There is extensive evidence-based to
support FPE and well-functioning educational models to use this work. FPE pay dividends for people,
society, and the economy.
﻿
Section 3
Treatment, Monitoring, and Satisfaction of the Elderly
Proposals for treatment and intervention in the elderly, ranging from illness to therapeutic adherence,
not forgetting the factors that affect the satisfaction of individuals in the provision of healthcare with the
monitorization of all the processes are explored.
Chapter 10
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease: A
Scoping Review................................................................................................................................... 157
Tânia Martins Gonçalves, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria da Conceição Farinha, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Cristina Marques-Vieira, Nursing School, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Portugal
Maria Augusta Gomes Alves Ferreira, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria Adelaide Paiva, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria do Céu Neves, Higher School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
The increase in average life expectancy, accompanied by medical and technological advances, translates
into an increase in chronic diseases and a constant updating of therapeutic strategies whose success
depends on patient compliance. This scoping review followed the JBI methodology, according to the PCC
method, and the aim was to identify measures associated with nursing care that improve the therapeutic
adherence of the elderly with a chronic disease. These nursing interventions include continuous monitoring
and surveillance, in person or digitally, using videos, remote monitoring software, or teleconsultations;
personalized therapeutic plans; skills training based on a model of information, motivation, and behavior;
the explanation of the value and therapeutic intent of the care plan; cognitive behavioral therapy; and
the continuous validation through the teach-back method. Evidence shows the relevance of nursing
intervention in the process of health education to the elderly person.
Chapter 11
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare: A Cognitive Ability Testing Guide.......... 170
Aikaterini Christogianni, Loughborough University, UK
Neuropsychological testing is necessary to assess cognitive functions in individuals who exhibit signs
of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. This chapter presents the most commonly used
cognitive assessments for MCI and dementia in healthcare and academia, including information about
normative data, and cut-off scores. Some of the tests presented are: the mini-mental state examination,
trail making tests, montreal cognitive assessment, Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale-cognitive, and
clock drawing test. In addition, the chapter discusses the benefits of timely diagnosis and limitations in
the testing assessments that might affect the quality of life in individuals with cognitive decline due to
MCI and dementia diagnosis.
﻿
Chapter 12
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction After Total Knee
Arthroplasty: A Study Based on a Classification and Regression Tree............................................... 192
Ana Paula Fontes, University of Algarve, Portugal
Ana Marreiros, University of Algarve, Portugal
Marina Gueorguieva Kovatchki, University of Algarve, Portugal
Nuno César Barbosa, Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
Daniel Bernardino, Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
Acácio Ramos, Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
João Paulo Sousa, Algarve Private Hospital, Portugal
Patient satisfaction has gained relevance in clinical practice, and knowing the variables with the greatest
predictive power in this assessment is vital. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the
relationship between postoperative satisfaction of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and
acquired functioning and to determine differences between sexes. This retrospective observational study
included 183 patients undergoing TKA between 2018–2021. Functioning variables were pain, range of
motion, gait distance, and WOMAC domains. There were significant differences in gait distance, pain,
and WOMAC between the pre- and postoperative periods. Women had worse scores in final evaluation
moments, although satisfaction was similar between the sexes. Satisfaction and the difference and the
rate of change in WOMAC were significantly correlated. In the classification and regression tree analysis,
the variable that most differentiated satisfaction in women was the WOMAC variation; in men, it was
the pain variation rate.
Chapter 13
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare: A Systematic Literature Review................... 211
Hawa A. Zanzeh, Social Organization, Ghana
Luis Pedro Ribeiro, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela Magalhães Ribeiro, School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal & University
Hospital Center of Algarve, Portugal
Helena Almeida, University of Algarve, Portugal
The study aimed to understand the measures of person-centered healthcare quality variables and how they
affect patient satisfaction and responsiveness. To address the objective, the study adopted a systematic
literature approach to review 20 related studies, selected using inclusion and exclusion criteria as well
as the PRISMA flowchart, and analysed using thematic analysis. The study revealed several variables
that included institutional factors, quality dimensions, and socioeconomic factors had a relationship
with service quality in healthcare delivery which influences patients’ perception, care experiences, and
the quality of services they receive. Therefore, it is recommended that the management of hospitals
consider these variables and socioeconomic factors like age, cultural beliefs, level of education, income,
and occupation of patients to provide health personnel a better understanding of patients and treat them
based on their specific needs when providing general services.
Chapter 14
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration......................................................... 231
Joel Guerreiro, Universidade do Algarve, Portugal
In the last few years, many advances in sensing usage have been developed, and their application on
healthcare is substantially growing due to many factors, but the most important one is the patient’s
physical parameters data gathering for remote monitorization and intervention. Sensing and actuation
﻿
as a service using clouds as basis may provide a platform to directly connect the patient’s sensors to
the health care providers and fast monitor or intervene in case of alarm, especially on elderly people.
In Portugal, all patient’s data is collected to a personal patient data register (health portal), that can be
seen by any medical and technical health staff working on public institutions. This study aims to design
a framework using sensing and actuation as a service on clouds able to provide data integration into the
Portuguese National Patient Data Register and alarm triggering for fast medical intervention.
Section 4
Elderly Care Differences and Protection Policies
Elderly care differences and protection policies through the promotion of outpatient care, health
education, fundamental protection and promotion of the rights of the elderly, and the safeguarding of
human dignity are explored.
Chapter 15
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia: Different Cultures, Same Goal................................ 249
Carla Piscarreta Damásio, Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology, School of
Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria, Portugal
Gordana Ristevska Dimitrovska, Higher Medical School, University St. Kliment Ohridski
Bitola, North Macedonia
Aging is a challenge for the whole of society and for all generations, involving issues related to
intergenerational solidarity, but also to adapting to their new needs. The WHO has established guidelines
for the care of the elderly. However, the realities and cultures of countries influence the provided care.
It was in this sense that this chapter addresses: characterize the elderly care in Portugal and in North
Macedonia; describe the elderly care contexts existing in Portugal and in North Macedonia; and reflect
about the similarities and differences about elderly care in Portugal and in North Macedonia. Despite the
different realities, cultures, and policies of the two countries under study, the authors found that the elderly
are cared for in different and distinct contexts, and there is a shortage of structural and human resources.
Chapter 16
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging............................. 284
Carmen Macedo, University of Algarve, Portugal
This Chapter aims to contribute to the deepening of scientific knowledge in the area of active and healthy
aging, considering as fundamental the protection and promotion of the rights of the elderly and the
safeguarding of human dignity, with a purpose to their effective implementation. In this perspective,
on the one hand, we recognize that global and universal demographic aging is increasingly active and
participatory in society. On the other hand, we assist in situations of profound vulnerability and risk,
through the phenomenon of violence against the elderly, which implies their detection, prevention,
investigation, and adoption of social policies and legislation.
Compilation of References................................................................................................................ 305
About the Contributors..................................................................................................................... 363
Index.................................................................................................................................................... 369
﻿
Preface
Today’s society gives importance to aging in the last decades of the individual’s life, which are usually
those in which the health condition tends to deteriorate, and the set of chronic pathologies increases.
Action at this level is verified through the increased concern of government officials with the elderly
population, motivated by the socio-economic impact of the costs associated with the provision of health
care in this demographic group. The increase in longevity in most developed countries is seen as a result
of a better quality of life during working years, however, the time gained doesn’t entail the same quality
of life. Therefore, it is important to understand how the quality of life can be enhanced as the population
ages, and for that an adequate assessment process is necessary, providing the ability to intervene
properly and without jeopardizing the whole of society (e.g., the overload of health services). With the
correct assessment, it will be possible to plan and improve the way health services provide their users
with a healthy aging. In the field of health assessments for an aging population, there is a need for an
updated collection of original research.
This book will aim to provide relevant theoretical frameworks and the latest empirical research
findings in health assessments for an aging population. It was written for academics, researchers, and
health professionals who want to improve their understanding of the aging process and work together
to translate evidence-based research into interdisciplinary, easy-to-use tools. Above all, improve the
quality of life of those who age.
The target audience of this book will be composed of researchers, practitioners, and students, working
in the field of health sciences in various disciplines dedicated to improving the healthcare of older
adults and quality of life, such as e.g. geriatric medicine, gerontological nursing, gerontological social
work, gerontology, rehabilitation science, fall prevention, patient safety, social aspects of care, health
economy, psychology, policy, law and older adults themselves and their caregivers. Contains state-ofthe-
art research, practices, and related practices and guidelines.
This book is divided into four sections, with contents on “Assessment of health and functioning of
elderly” (four Chapters), “Health promotion and disease prevention: intervention and implications” (five
Chapters), “Treatment, monitoring and satisfaction of the elderly” (five chapters), and the fourth and
last section “Elderly care differences and protection policies” (two Chapters), for a total of 16 chapters
that provide relevant theoretical and practical frameworks.
The first section is composed of four chapters related to the assessment of health and functioning of
elderly, it encompasses matters related to the scales and instruments used in health that are fractured in
the results presented by different authors due to their inappropriate use.
The first chapter is on “Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health.” This
chapter compares assessment techniques in education and health. The examples provided are drawn
xv
Preface
from assessments made for learning in a secondary school as compared with assessments of functioning
in the care of older people. According to the authors these two domains of assessment share not only a
common information and terminological structure but also a Common Assessment Framework which is
shown to be extendable by process detail. In our focus on assessment in health, particularly in active and
healthy ageing, our model is intended to support the integration of information and processes (decision
and intervention pathways) supporting various types of providers.
The second chapter is “Health and functioning assessment with numeric and symbolic values,” and
covers aspects related to showing how the assessment values often are viewed as part of a numeric scale,
whereas the fact values are understood more as symbolic in an ordinary scale. The author gives us a
perspective of the challenge through examples from the classification of functioning.
The third chapter is “Neuropsychological assessment and financial capacity in older adults: A review
based on up-to-date knowledge” and this chapter explores the theoretical models on which relevant neuropsychological
instruments have been proposed and are in use in different cultural settings. In addition
to that, factors that can predict financial capacity performance are presented and an attempt is made to
propose relevant assessment protocols by taking into consideration up-to-to-date knowledge on this topic.
The fourth chapter is “Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health ” and
reflects the conceptual aspects of functioning according to WHO and operated by the International Classification
of Functioning and how insufficiently it has been applied to most countries because of its lack
of adequacy. In the chapter, the authors reflect on the contributions that the International Classification
of Functioning can make to organizational, legislative, and structural needs in terms of aging.
The second section “Health promotion and disease prevention: intervention and implications,” is
composed of five chapters, where the importance of the education of the elderly is highlighted, through
an individual physical exercise program using everyday objects, and equine-assisted therapy programs
to promote wellbeing and prevent falls.
The fifth chapter on “The PERMA Model of Wellbeing: A Comprehensive Framework for Enhancing
Reminiscence in the Elderly” focuses on how the model can promote reminiscence and improve
psychological wellbeing, social connectedness, and reduce depression and anxiety. The PERMA Model
was chosen for its holistic approach and positive effects on the elderly population. It is important to
incorporate the PERMA Model in enhancing reminiscence, promoting positive aging and enhancing
the quality of life.
The sixth chapter is entitled “Physical Activity Program for Older People: Methodological Approach
and Practical Implications” and the main objective is to present a PA program for older people, which
can be carried out with very simple materials and accessible to any elderly person, being structured in
three distinct phases. The first phase encompasses joint and organic mobilization. The 2nd: includes
the fundamental part of the physical exercises and activities to be carried out. Finally, the 3rd: “return
to calm” part, where some stretching exercises are proposed, so that participants gradually recover from
the positive effects of the PA session and reflect on it.
The seventh chapter on “Contributions of Equine-assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly: A
Scoping Review” conducts the relevant scoping review on scientific production regarding the contributions
of equine-assisted therapy to the health of elderly people. It followed the JBI methodology, according
to the PCC method. Equine-assisted Therapy has shown benefits in healthy elderly people: increasing
trunk neuromuscular activation, balance, flexibility, agility, and coordination.
The eighth chapter on “Ambulatory Wellbeing: Perspectives on Senescence in Gerontology ” contextualizes
and frames falls and fall injuries as a societal challenge by deconstructing the characteristic
xvi
Preface
physiological processes of senescence and identifying key areas for fundamental address in the prevention
of falls ‘in situ’. Chapter focus is predominantly aligned to those processes of natural senescence aligned
with normal ageing processes, alongside those pathologies which constitute abnormal pathological
processes, which occur more often in older adults as a consequence of these processes of senescence.
The ninth chapter on “Prevent falls - Emphasize Education to Support Older Person Active Ageing ”
has its focus on Falls prevention education (FPE) is critical to prevent falls among older people. FPE is
required for all key stakeholders including older people health care professionals and students, as well
as other professionals who work with or offer services for older people, which will provide dividends
to all of society, through the health of the elderly and economic impact.
The third section “Treatment, monitoring and satisfaction of the elderly” is composed of five chapters
with proposals for treatment and intervention in the elderly, ranging from illness to therapeutic adherence.
Not forgetting the factors that affect the satisfaction of individuals in the provision of health care
with the monitorization of all the processes.
The tenth chapter on ” Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly with Chronic
Disease: A Scoping Review,” presents a scoping review following the JBI methodology, according to
the PCC method and the aim was to identify measures associated with nursing care that improve the
therapeutic adherence of the elderly with a chronic disease. These nursing interventions include continuous
monitoring and surveillance, in person or digitally, using videos, remote monitoring software,
or teleconsultations; personalized therapeutic plans; skills training based on a model of information,
motivation, and behavior; the explanation of the value and therapeutic intent of the care plan; cognitive
behavioral therapy; and the continuous validation through the teach-back method.
In the eleventh chapter on “Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare: A Cognitive
Ability Testing Guide,” the author provides us with the most used cognitive assessments for mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) and dementia in healthcare and academia, including information about normative
data, and cut-off scores. The chapter discusses the benefits of timely diagnosis and limitations in the
testing assessments that might affect the quality of life in individuals with cognitive decline due to MCI
and dementia diagnosis.
The twelfth chapter on “Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
After Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Study Based on a Classification and Regression Tree,” presentes a
retrospective study wherein the primary objective was to evaluate the relationship between postoperative
satisfaction of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and acquired functioning and
to determine differences between sexes. There were significant differences in gait distance, pain, and
WOMAC between the pre- and postoperative periods. Women had worse scores in final evaluation moments,
although satisfaction was similar between the sexes.
The thirteenth chapter on “Factors Influencing patients’ Satisfaction in Healthcare: A Systematic
Literature Review” presents a systematic literature approach to understand the measures of personcentered
healthcare quality variables and how they affect patient satisfaction and responsiveness. The
study revealed some variables that included institutional factors, quality dimensions and socioeconomic
factors that had a relationship with service quality in healthcare delivery which influences patients’
perception, care experiences and the quality of services they receive.
The fourteenth chapter on “Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration” points
out how the advances in sensing usage have been developed and how their application in health care is
substantially growing due to many factors, but the most important one is the patient’s physical parameters,
as data gathering can support remote monitorization and intervention. This study aims to design
xvii
Preface
a framework using Sensing and Actuation as a Service on the cloud, able to provide data integration
into the Portuguese National Patient Data Register and alarm triggering for fast medical intervention.
The fourth and last section is composed of two chapters that approach “Elderly care differences and
protection policies,” through the promotion of outpatient care, health education, fundamental protection
and promotion of the rights of the elderly, and the safeguarding of human dignity.
The fiftheenth chapter on “Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia - Different cultures, same
goal” reflects the similarities and differences between elderly care in Portugal and North Macedonia true
a characterization of the elderly care provided in both countries and their contexts. The two countries
under study have different realities, cultures, and policies. Also, the authors found that the elderly are
cared for in different and distinct contexts, and there is a shortage of structural and human resources.
The sixteen and last chapter on “Challenges from protecting the elderly to promoting Active and
Healthy Aging ” underlines the importance as fundamental the protection and promotion of the rights of
the elderly and the safeguarding of human dignity, with a purpose to their effective implementation. This
chapter gives expression to the situations of profound vulnerability and risk, through the phenomenon
of violence against the elderly, which implies their detection, prevention, investigation and adoption of
social policies and legislation.
CONCLUSION
The book provides a comprehensive overview of the current state of health assessments for an aging
population, and offers a comprehensive set of tools and strategies to help professionals in the field. It also
provides an in-depth analysis of the challenges and opportunities that come with the aging population,
and how to best address them. The book also offers a range of practical solutions to help professionals
in the field to better understand the complexities of health assessments for an aging population.
Aging is a complex process that involves physical, psychological, and social changes. It is a global
phenomenon that will continue to have a profound impact on healthcare systems around the world. As
people age, they are more likely to suffer from chronic illnesses, which require long-term care. The cost
of providing care for these conditions is increasing, and the number of elderly people is expected to
continue to rise in the coming years.
In addition, the elderly often requires more complex care than younger patients. The challenge is
to ensure that healthcare systems must become more efficient and effective to provide comprehensive,
high-quality care that is tailored to the needs of older adults. This includes investing in preventative
health measures, providing access to specialized services, and ensuring that healthcare providers are
adequately trained to provide care for the elderly. Aging is a global issue that requires a global perspective,
and health is a major component of that perspective.
Luis Vieira Ribeiro
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela Magalhães Ribeiro
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
xviii
Section 1
This section encompasses matters related to the scales and instruments used in health that are fractured
in the results presented by different authors due to their inappropriate use.
Assessment of the Health and
Functioning of the Elderly
1
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 1
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch001
ABSTRACT
In this chapter the authors compare assessment techniques in education and health. These examples are
drawn from assessment for learning in secondary school as compared with assessment of functioning in
care of older people. Content in these respective assessment environments is obviously quite different,
but there is some overlap, in particular related to social circumstances. The authors further argue that
the assessment structure and formal analysis techniques are and even should be quite similar. These two
domains of assessments share not only a common information and terminological structure, but also a
common assessment framework (CAF) which is shown to be extendable by process detail. In this focus
on assessment in health, particularly in active and healthy ageing, the model is intended to support the
integration of information and processes (decision and intervention pathways) supporting various types
of providers.
INTRODUCTION
The common assessment framework1 (CAF) is more ‘common’ as a general overview than a real
‘framework’ for integrating information and process structures. It is used in many European countries
and regions for “self-assessment” to improve public organizations in particular in public administration
like education and health. Even if called a ‘framework’ and supposed to include assessment scales and
similar quantifications and qualifications, CAF per se does not embrace any formal or methodological
A Comparative Framework
for Assessment in
Education and Health
Heidi-Tuulia Eklund
University of Jyväskylä, Finland
Patrik Eklund
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3965-2834
Umea University, Sweden
2
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
approaches to formal process based framework or information structure and terminology based assessment.
Therefore, as a candidate for complying with an ontology or, more formally and computationally,
a namespace of information, CAF is structurally shallow.
Basically, CAF is a framework torso without any specific assessment scales or structures to enable
organization of data information into a framework a logically full-bodied namespace.
In this chapter we provide CAF with an enrichment where we view information and process as part
of the framework, so that assessment can be structurally formalized within such a syntactically welldeveloped
framework.
In our focus on assessment in education, with particular views on assessment of learning, our model
is intended, on the one hand, to support curriculum task forces within national boards of education, and,
on the other hand, to provide assessment framework toolsets in order to support curriculum regional task
forces in municipalities, thus ultimately supporting curriculum planning workgroups as well as teachers
and teams as education providers.
In education, perception and performance are expected to be observed and assessed within modules of
particular syllabi of courses. In active and healthy ageing, assessment of functioning plays an important
role. These modules are processes within which tokens and data objects carry data and information, in
the end appearing in assessment scales and further used in overall quality assurance. These processes
are further integrated as subprocesses in a general process in education and health, including feedback
loops representing quality assurance on all levels from national education curricula and care guidelines
through municipal and regional adaptations, all the way down to specific education syllabi and care
practices as specified in detail for and within particular schools and points of care.
In our focus on assessment in health, we present particular detail within assessment in active and
healthy ageing as personalized as well as population based. Personalized assessment relates to monitoring
of functioning and health conditions of an individual as a basis for arriving at suitable prevention
Figure 1. Overview of the CAF model
3
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
and intervention. Information structure and related ontology is then important basis within a Common
Assessment Framework for Active and Healthy Ageing (CAFAHA) as a methodology and information
structure for personalized health assessment.
ASSESSMENT IN EDUCATION
‘Educational assessment’ refers to the set of methods and processes by which evidence about student
learning is designed, collected, scored, analysed, and interpreted. (Brown, 2017)
We may view assessment scales for teaching and learning as related to performance and capabilities,
and as based on scaling instruments respectively for Activity, Skill, Inclusion, Attitude and Cerebration.
Activity subdivides into social and individual activity. Attitude is individual, whereas inclusion is a social
aspect. Cerebration relates to mental and cognitive capacity, and is further related with intellection
and mentation. Circumstance and health are more of environmental factors, and family situations often
interact with other subareas of assessment.
Figure 2. Grouping of factors appearing in assessment of learning (Eklund et al, 2014)
4
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
A generally accepted and comprehensive core set of assessment scales in education is, however, yet
to be developed, i.e., the grouping depicted in Fig. 2 is more of a placeholder for assessment instruments
yet to be developed.
Our example education case is drawn from teaching history of classical music in secondary school,
using process drama (Eklund, 2015), and turning Mozart’s biography and life story into a basic set of
facts, underlying a basic script for a ‘life process’ or ‘milestones in life’, thus creating the drama fiction
and a classroom drama about Mozart’s life. The pilot course is History of Classical Music as presented
at seventh grade, where in a specific part of it we used an eight hours block for A journey with Wolfel
in 18th Europe, with Mozart’s Requiem being and excerpt from that journey. The teacher-in-role is basically
that of the narrator, and students are 18th century characters, one of them obviously being Wolfel.
The subprocess outline (Eklund et al, 2013) and structure is based on Freytag’s Technique of the
Drama (Freytag, 1900), describing the process drama. The subprocess includes the following tasks:
• Improvisation and conflict – Activating the students to rehearse and perform the Dance of death
(Music: Dies irae from Mozart’s Requiem).
• Complication and storytelling – Facts of Mozart’s life at the end of his life, where Death is knocking
at the door.
• Ceremonial action and climax with candles, red cloak and Mozart’s death mask. Activating
the students to put Mozart’s cloak and mask on the table. Lighting up some candles. (Music:
Lacrymosa from Mozart’s Requiem).
• Resolution and conversation with students: How did they feel during the process? What did they
like? What did they not like? What did they learn about Mozart and life in general in the eighteenth
century? Marking the moment.
Student activation is important, and is monitored using observation and assessment of student presence
and receptivity. Observation is based on formal logic language, and assessment is related to logical
structures within that logic.
In this view of drama as process, token flow within the process carries information from activities
and events, and thereby student’s capacity and talent can be monitored.
Teachers’ perceptions of their own professional identity affect their ability and capacity to work, and
further affects the ability and desire to cope with changes in their own teaching (McConville et al, 2019).
The practice of using drama methods is therefore related to a diversity of factors connected with the
well-being of teachers at work. Assessment of teaching as an assessment complement to assessment of
learning is then comparable to assessment of care provision as complementing assessment of well-being
of older people. Ethical aspects will also come into play, as shown e.g. for ethics related assessment of
care provision in nursing (Frilund et al, 2013).
Use of drama pedagogy in teaching leads to a creative way of working, which is expected to motivate
students and at the same time also strengthening teacher’s own relations to their work and working
environments. Working methods of drama also provide teachers with incentives for further training and
lifelong learning (McDonagh et al, 2017).
5
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
ASSESSMENT IN HEALTH
Assessment in health is challenging especially when ‘health & social’ need to be considered for provision
of a holistic functioning view of an individual, particularly in the case of older persons, where multiple
diseases and a complexity of functioning problems come into play when considering various forms of
interventions.
Assessment scales for older persons functioning, e.g. as provided within Comprehensive Geriatric
Assessment, CGA, (Stuck et al, 1993) viewed as a combination of information content and structure, are
poorly equipped with terminology, formalism and logical support. This eventually disables inclusion of
knowledge, elicited from observations in assessment data, into guidelines not only within assessment
of functioning of older people, but also more generally within municipal and regional decision-making
concerning care of older persons.
Falls prevention, as part of CGA as an assessment framework, is a good example of the need for
“assessment-in-assessment”, where fall risk assessment should be part of a more general geriatric assessment
in particular for the purpose of establishing functioning profiles.
In comparison with assessment in education, assessment in health is quite well developed, even
if consensus about how to use the diversity of assessment instruments in practice is yet to be reached
within the care communities.
Figure 3. Teaching subprocess (Eklund, 2015)
6
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
CAF IN EDUCATION
A curriculum, and in particular as including specific and detailed syllabi for courses and modules included
in the curriculum, is usually well understood and even perceived by teachers, but a more formal
distinction between curriculum and syllabus is surprisingly rare. A curriculum is mostly an unstructured
‘set’ of courses, whereas a syllabus is a ‘ordered list’ (otherwise also unstructured) of particular objectives
within a course. Assessment or quality assurance for a curriculum is then not only a summation or
summary of some specific assessments of related syllabi.
Criteria indicating when the student and how the teacher qualifications have been reached is handled
only informally, providing only little and shallow information detail related to criteria, thereby not enabling
more formal assessment of skill level and proficiency. A clear and formal distinction between
the student and the teacher is also crucial, as the teacher adhers to executing the curriculum and syllabi,
whereas the student complies with and is committed to the teaching and learning process as conducted
and executed by the teacher.
The teacher provides in teaching and the student perceives while learning, where both provision and
perception is subject to quality assurance using various types of assessment. Such an assessment framework
must be based on carefully selected and well targeted criteria, which in turn are to be grounded
in the objectives of the curriculum. The hierarchy and specificity of curricula varies between regions
in respective countries, and even between municipals in respective regions. The shallow CAF structure
being ‘common’ reflects this situation.
We recommend identifying national curricula as adopted in respective municipalities or regions, and
as finalized in each school by their internal curriculum task forces. The particular example drawn in
this chapter has its focus on music teaching in secondary school using drama process as a teaching and
learning methodology (Eklund et al, 2013), and the process as being encoded in Fig. 5 adopting the use
of BPMN (Business Process Modelling Notation).
Figure 4. Fall risk assessment connected with geriatric assessment (EIP AHA, Action Group A2)
7
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
Process drama (Bolton, 1979) is mostly seen as a particular methodology for teaching and learning,
but it also embraces teaching as a process and tool. The teaching process thereby develops towards
adopting drama process methodology and drama based teaching. (Heathcote et al, 1995).
Our focus is on assessment of learning, rather than for learning or as learning. Assessment of learning
is logically and numerically qualified and quantified, and also communicated between curriculum
task forces, and for which we have proposed a formal logic based methodology for quality assurance
of learning and teaching, including a formal framework for integration of specific assessment scales to
support quality assurance. (Eklund et al, 2014)
Key performance results within CAF cannot be specifically calculated, unless a proper set of assessment
scales has been installed into some monitoring process related to education. Student and teacher
oriented observations related to activity and skill need to be complemented with assessment of inclusion,
attitude and cerebration. CAF does not cover detail related to such assessments.
The relation between educational and health assessment is additionally important. Educational assessment
differs from health assessment basically only in content, but the information structures and
decision procedures use similar logic languages and underlying algebraic structures for aggregation of
qualitative and quantitative data.
Figure 5. ‘Teachers & Teams subprocess’ in the overall education quality assurance process (Eklund
et al, 2013)
8
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
CAF IN HEALTH
Personalized assessment of functioning and health within active and healthy ageing also involves WHOWHERE-
WHAT-WHY-HOW. Various types of professionals (WHO) are multi-acting, also with informal
carers, and are involved at various locations (WHERE), both as locations and forms of living as well
as points-of-care. Assessment content (WHAT) and its granularity as data and information structure
involves (at least) social and health data as related to functioning, typically using WHO’s (World Health
Organization) International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), assessment scales
in old age psychiatry (Burns et al, 2009), and Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA) (Stuck et al,
1993). The information and process structure of WHO-WHERE-WHAT builds upon particular strategies
and objectives (WHY). Good practices (HOW) together with specific recommendations and guidelines
are then subject to evaluation.
Figure 7. Drama process within CAF
Figure 6. Assessment of learning within CAF
9
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
In health, as compared to process view in education, similar BPMN models have been developed for
falls prevention (Eklund, 2021).
Information structure representation of nomenclatures and classifications is provided by WHO’s
Family of International Classifications (WHO-FIC). The reference classifications ICD (diseases) and
ICF (functioning) appear potentially in a structured relation with each other. The information entities
in ICF are inherently multivalent, and classifications recognize this multivalence through introduction
of its generic scale. This, in turn, requires the formal management of many-valuedness and uncertainty
in a logical setting (Eklund, 2016).
ICF is specific concerning uncertainties related to truth values. ICF comes with a 5-scale, so that
e.g. “Energy level (b1300)” is not just a matter of yes/no, but graded in a way that can also be see as
logical truth degrees:
xxx.0 NO problem
xxx.1 MILD problem
xxx.2 MODERATE problem
xxx.3 SEVERE problem
xxx.4 COMPLETE problem
xxx.8 not specified
xxx.9 not applicable
The degrees xxx.0 to xxx.4 can be seen as an ordered set of truth degrees including five points, where
‘xxx.0’ is logically ‘true’ and ‘xxx.4’ is logically ’false’. This binding should not be done at a syntactic
Figure 8. Observe-Assess-Decide (OAD) teams providing falls prevention and mitigation
10
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
level, but rather to be considered on a semantic level. There is also a distinction to be made between
‘xxx.8 not specified’ and ‘xxx.9 not applicable’, the former basically saying that a truth degree has yet
not been provided, and the latter basically saying that the typing of the factor is not applicable. If ’not
specified’ is represented by the unital ‘e’ in a quantale, a special type of an algebraic structure (Eklund
et al, 2018), with 6-valued set {e,F,a,b,c,T} of truth values, corresponding respectively to the ICF
valuations {xxx8, xxx4, xxx3, xxx2, xxx1, xxx0}, then a first observation is that the unital can appear
in different relations with respect to the other values. (Eklund, 2021)
Here it should be noted that a 6-valued unital quantale is not unique, an therefore the particular choice
of the quantale should be carefully selected and related to the health and social care domain where it is
applied. For examples of quantales used with ICF data, see (Eklund, 2021).
The following provides the basic listing for an example of a ICF Core Set for social assessment:
Subgroups obtain their valuations given an aggregation of valuations of items in subgroups, so that
e.g. the valuation of Activity is the aggregation of valuations respectively of b1300 and b1301. If b1300
is ‘NO problem’ and b1301 also is ‘NO problem’ we obviously expect Activity to be ‘NO problem’. The
aggregation of other combinations depends on the choice of the underlying unital quantale.
CONCLUSION
Assessment in education and health is comparable in that they share a common assessment framework
and information structure. Education and teaching pathways and processes are further designed similarly
as compared to pathways and processes describing good practices in care environments.
Table 1.Subgroup
ICF
Activity b1300, b1301
Capability b1266, b1400, b1601
Inclusion b1261, b1262, b1264, d9108, d9205
Attitude e425, e465
Mood b1522
Circumstance e5700, e5750
Family e310, e320
11
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
REFERENCES
Bolton, G. M. (1979). Towards a Theory of Drama in Education. Longman.
Brown, G. T. L. (2017). Assessment of Student Achievement (1st ed.). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315162058
Burns, A., Lawlor, B., & Craig, S. (2009). Assessment Scales in Old Age Psychiatry (2nd ed.). Informa
Healthcare.
Eklund, H.-T. (2015). “I felt like being Mozart” - Process drama in Teaching Music History in Finnish
[“Tunne oli kuin Mozartilla välillä” - Prosessidraama musiikinhistorian opetuksessa]. Jyväskylä
University (https://jyx.jyu.fi/handle/123456789/46420)
Eklund, H.-T., & Eklund, P. (2013). In R. B. Thorkelsdóttir & Á. H. Ragnardóttir (Eds.), Logic and
process drama. FLíSS - Drama Boreale, Earth-Air-Water-Fire (pp. 103–115). Háskólaprent.
Eklund, H.-T., & Eklund, P. (2014). Process drama based information management for assessment and
classification in learning. In W. Pedrycz & S. M. Chen (Eds.), Social Networks: A Framework of Computational
Intelligence. Studies in Computational Intelligence (Vol. 526). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-02993-1_15
Eklund, P. (2016). In M. M. Cruz-Cunha & I. Miranda (Eds.), Lative logic accomodating the WHO Family
of International Classifications. Encyclopedia of E-Health and Telemedicine (pp. 661–673). IGI Global.
Eklund, P. (2021). Information and Process in Health. In P. Eklund (Ed.), Integrated Care and Fall Prevention
in Active and Healthy Aging (pp. 263–279). IGI Global. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-
4411-2.ch015.
Eklund, P., Gutiérrez García, J., Höhle, U., & Kortelainen, J. (2018). Semigroups in complete lattices :
Quantales, modules and related topics. Developments in Mathematics 54. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-78948-4
Freytag, G. (1900). Technique of the Drama: An Exposition of Dramatic Composition and Art (3rd ed.).
Scott, Foresman and company.
Frilund, M., Fagerström, L., Eriksson, K., & Eklund, P. (2013). Assessment of ethical ideals and
ethical manners in care of older people. Nursing Research and Practice. Article ID, 374132, 1–11.
doi:10.1155/2013/374132 PMID:23577242
Heathcote, D., & Bolton, G. (1995). Drama for Learning. Heinemann.
McConville K. & Ludecke, M. (2019). Practice what you preach: research-based theatre as a method to
investigate drama teacher professional identity. Drama Australia journal 43(2), 83-99.
McDonagh, F., & Finneran, M. (2017). The teacher as co-creator of drama: A phenomenological study
of the experiences and reflections of Irish primary school teachers. Irish Educational Studies, 36(2),
169–183. doi:10.1080/03323315.2017.1324806
12
A Comparative Framework for Assessment in Education and Health
﻿
Stuck, A. E., Siu, A. L., Wieland, G. D., Adams, J., & Rubenstein, L. Z. (1993). Comprehensive geriatric
assessment: A meta-analysis of controlled trials. Lancet, 342(8878), 1032–1036. doi:10.1016/0140-
6736(93)92884-V PMID:8105269
ENDNOTE
1 CAF results from co-operation among the European Union ministers responsible for public administration,
and CAF is promoted by EIPA (European Institute of Public Administration), http://
caf.eipa.eu). A pilot version of CAF was launched in 2000 and several revised versions have been
presented, including the CAF 2013 version, which is referred to in this chapter.
13
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 2
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch002
ABSTRACT
This chapter shows how assessment values often are viewed as part of a numeric scale, where in fact
the fact values are understood more as symbolic in an ordinary scale. Computing with numeric and
symbolic values is different, and challenging in particular if and when computations have to be intertwined.
Computing with numeric values involves traditional applied and numerical mathematics, whereas
computing with symbolic values involves logic and algebra. In this chapter the authors illuminate these
aspects using examples from classification of functioning.
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we point out the importance not to mistreat symbolic values in assessments as numeric
values. It is common in Likert like scales to understand the ordinal scale as a sequence of numbers, so
that a 5-scale is represented by the numbers {0,1,2,3,4} or {1,2,3,4,5}, and computing with the values in
the scale becomes computing with numbers. Doing so ignores the logical nature of such a scale, where
the extreme values represent good/bad or true/falls, and values in between represent levels of uncertainty
with respect to the extreme values.
A typical finite and ordinal scale is provided within ICF (International Classification of Functioning,
Disability and Health), as part of WHO-FIC (World Health Organization - Family of International Classification)
classifications), which involves computing with its generic 5-scale of values. We will show
how a logical-algebraic approach to computing with these values is done utilizing algebraic structures
represented by quantales. We will also show how the 6th and 7th values annotated with ICF’s core 5-scale
can be integrated into the computations. Those additional 6th and 7th values enable us to compute with
Health and Functioning
Assessment With Numeric
and Symbolic Values
Patrik Eklund
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3965-2834
Umea University, Sweden
14
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
missing and incomplete data. Conventional data analysis using numerical and statistical methods is unable
to handle missing data in these ways.
The WHO Family of International Classifications and Terminologies includes the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), the International Classification
of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), and the International Classification of Health Interventions
(ICHI). These are the so called Reference Classifications that “serve as the global standards for health
data, clinical documentation and statistical aggregation”.
Apart from the Reference Classifications, there are other classifications including International Classification
of Diseases for Oncology, International Classification of Primary Care, International Classification
of External Causes of Injury (ICECI), Technical aids for persons with disabilities, The Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical Classification System with Defined Daily Doses (ATC/DDD),International Classification
for Nursing Practice (ICNP), Verbal autopsy standards: ascertaining and attributing causes of
death tool, and The Startup Mortality List (ICD-10-SMoL).
For ICF (ICF, 2001) there is the main English version and additionally there are translations to a
number of languages, and more translations are desired. ICF was officially endorsed by all 191 WHO
Member States in the Fifty-fourth World Health Assembly on 22 May 2001 as the international standard
to describe and measure health and disability.
Items in the four components of ICF are arranged in a hierarchical structure, where items appear
under sections, sections under chapters, and chapters within components.
Component
Chapters
Sections
Items
Some items further subdivide into subitems. There are four components, the first of which is ‘Body
functions’. Here is an example of items in a section in a chapter:
Body functions
Body structures
Activities and participation
Environmental factors
Chapter 3 Support and relationships
Global mental functions (b110-b139)
b110 Consciousness functions
b114 Orientation functions
b117 Intellectual functions
Each item can be qualified, and qualifiers appear in a 5-scale:
xxx.0 NO problem
xxx.1 MILD problem
xxx.2 MODERATE problem
xxx.3 SEVERE problem
15
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
xxx.4 COMPLETE problem
xxx.8 not specified
xxx.9 not applicable
The first five build up the core scale of qualifiers, and appear algebraically as a lattice, and indeed as
lattice chain. Qualifiers xxx.0 to xxx.4 are just codes for particular levels in the scale. Using the numbers
0 to 4 to compute with them is not advisable. Clearly, COMPLETE can in some sense be seen as “more
than” SEVERE, as 4 is more than 3, but transforming the set
L= {NO, MILD, MODERATE, SEVERE, COMPLETE}
to the set of digits, as symbols,
N4= {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
will immediately, and unfortunately, invite to computing with these digits as numbers. This then adds
unintended and undesirable semantics to the members in L. In fact, adding N4 makes L come with a
companion function
f: L → N4
where f(NO)=0, …, f(COMPLETE)=4.
Note also how we do not necessarily need to arrange it like
f(COMPLETE)=0, …, f(NO)=4
The reverse,
f(NO)=-, …,f(COMPLETE)=4
is often preferred. These distinctions are not explicitly written or recommended in ICF manuals. Mapping
xxx.0 to the value 0 and xxx.4 to the value 4 is often adopted, but nowhere is it written or recommended
in ICF that it may be useful to consider such options. On computing with these values, it is immediately
clear that commutativity cannot be axiomatized.
For an operator *: L×L→L, it cannot be assume or required e.g. that
MILD*MODERATE = MODERATE*MILD
The advantage of using quantales is that all values, including the 6th and 7th values from ICF’s generic
scale, can be used by the operators. For example, we may include `xxx.8 not specified’ as a 6th element
to arrive a 6-point lattice, and use that element as a “missing value” or a value “not (yet) known” value.
Then we need to decide where, in relation to the 5-chain, this 6th element “not known” will be placed,
and further, how to compute with that value in the selected 6-point complete lattice (one of 15 lattices)
with underlying set
16
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
{NO, MILD, MODERATE, SEVERE, COMPLETE, NotKnown}
of elements in the lattice.
FINITE LATTICES
For n=2 and n=3, the 2-chain and 3-chain are the only lattices for 2-point and 3-point sets, not considering
the possibility of turning them upside down. For n=4, the 4-chain and the `diamond’ are the only
possible lattices.
For n=5, there are 5 lattices.
Figure 1. 4-point “diamond” lattice
Figure 2. All 5 lattices for a 5-point set
17
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
For n=6, there are 15 lattices.
From application point of view, useful lattices are those possessing a subchain of 5 elements, where
one element, the “not known” is “sidelined” to that chain. For example, in lattice (9), among the 6-point
lattices, the sidelined element 1 is below the top element and above the bottom element but unordered
or unrelated to all other elements. Lattice (11) is similar, but then elements 2 or 3 are unordered with
respect to each other. Lattices (2) and (5) have sideline elements that are in a “more optimistic way” ordered
with respect to the other elements. For instance, in lattice (2), elements 2 and 3 would correspond
to MILD and MODERATE, respectively, so by default, the missing value, the sidelined element 1, is
worse than NO (problem) but better that SEVERE (problem).
Lattice (13) has `not (yet) known’ as “optimistically” sidelined with the generic 5-scale.
QUANTALES
A quantale (X,*,,,,T) is a semigroup (X,*) and a complete lattice (X,,,,T) fulfilling the
condition that the semigroup operation is join-preserving in both variables, i.e., the following condition
is fulfilled:
x V a V x a
a A X a A X
* *
    ( ) = ( )
V a x V a x
aAX aAX ( )* = ( * )
for all x∈X and all A Í X .
Figure 3. All 15 lattices for a 6-point set
18
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
Note the convention  = , which means that
x *= *x =
for all x∈X. In some applications this condition may be too restrictive.
Note that a distributive lattice is a quantale with the join as the semigroup operation. However, this
is a very special kind of a quantale.
There are two quantales on a 2-pointed set, 12 quantales on a 3-pointed sets, 129 quantales on a
4-pointed set, 1852 quantales on a 5-pointed set, and 33391 quantales on a 6-pointed set.
Fig. 5 shows the number of quantales per lattice in the case of the 6-point lattices.
A unital quantale (X,*,e,,,,T) is a quantale where (X,*,e) is a monoid, and where the unit c
satisfies
x*c = e*x = x
for all x∈X. In applications, unital quantales are useful when the sidelined elements are viewed as units.
There are 2 830 quantales for the 6-point lattice (13), 57 of which are unital with the sidelined ‘not
known’ as the unit. We then have
x*NotKnown = NotKnown*x = x
Figure 4. Not yet known modelled as an optimistic value
19
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
for all values x in the generic 5-scale, i.e., computing with unknown values does not affect the overall
computation. One of the 57 semigroups as unital quantales is shown in Fig. 6.
Note how this particular semigroup operation in the quantale is non-commutative. Indeed, we have
SEVERE*MILD = COMPLET whereas MILD*SEVERE = SEVERE
The Catalogue of Quantales (Shamsgovara et al, 2019) contains a complete listing of all quantales
up to 6 elements.
Figure 5. Quantales distributed over lattices
Figure 6. Quantale nr 6.13.1160 (Shamsgovara et al, 2019)
20
Health and Functioning Assessment With Numeric and Symbolic Values
﻿
For more detail on the theory of quantales, including modules, see (Eklund et al, 2018). For more
detail on many-valued expressions, see see (Eklund et al, 2014).
Recent work (Shamsgovara, 2023) provides a listing of all quantales up to 9 elements, including
further detail on a range of quantale properties.
CONCLUSION
Applicability of quantales, in this paper shown in the context of ICF’s qualifiers, is not to be seen as
generic. Applications are often `in casu’. For example, when the unit in a unital quantale represents “not
yet known” or “(still) missing”, or something similar, not being known in relation to other elements in
the lattice. it must be further defined. In some case a not known value may be neutral in the sense of
nothing being said about its relation to the other elements. In other cases, a default like a missing value
being viewed as not necessarily bad or not necessarily good is sometimes desirable. In any case, the
context will decide how that unknown a priori is to be related to the other elements. Such considerations
are important in handling uncertainty for functioning in ICF. Apart from the applicability of quantales
for the generic scale in ICF, quantales can be used similarly e.g. for Likert type scales, or discretization
(categorization) of Visual Analogue Scales. In all these ordinal scales, the ability to compute with
missing data is an advantage.
REFERENCES
Eklund, P., Gutiérrez García, J., Höhle, U., & Kortelainen, J. (2018). Semigroups in Complete Lattices:
Quantales, Modules and Related Topics. Developments in Mathematics, 54, Springer.
Eklund, P., Galán, M. A., Helgesson, R., & Kortelainen, J. (2014). Fuzzy terms. Fuzzy Sets and Systems,
256, 211–235. doi:10.1016/j.fss.2013.02.012
ICF. (2001). International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). WHO. https://
www.who.int/classifications/icf/en/
Shamsgovara, A. (2023). Enumerating, Cataloguing and Classifying All Quantales on up to Nine Elements.
In R. Glück, L. Santocanale, & M. Winter (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Vol. 13896.
Relational and Algebraic Methods in Computer Science. RAMiCS 2023. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-
031-28083-2_14
Shamsgovara, A., Eklund, P., Winter, M., (2019). A Catalogue of Finite Quantales. GLIOC Notes.
21
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 3
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch003
ABSTRACT
Financial capacity and financial exploitation assessment in older adults is a topic of debate in modern
societies, given the economic, medical, legal, and ethical implications. Healthcare professionals, legal
professionals, older individuals (healthy as well as patients suffering from neurocognitive disorders),
family members/informal and/or formal caregivers, and the state are all involved in this complex process.
This chapter explores the theoretical models on which relevant neuropsychological instruments have
been proposed and are used in different cultural settings. In addition to that, factors that can predict
financial capacity performance are presented and an attempt is made to propose relevant assessment
protocols by taking into consideration up-to-to-date knowledge on this topic.
INTRODUCTION
Longer life expectancy is a worldwide phenomenon that raises economic, health, legal and ethical issues
(Giannouli, 2017a; 2019; 2020). The growing number of people over 65, raises a dire need for active
aging and a need for a life plan for the life span (Giannouli, 2016) in order to increase quality of life
during the aging process (World Health Organization, 2002).
Although the process of normal aging in general has an effect on basic cognitive functions, this effect
is continuously changing over time, thus recognizing and responding to changes in capacity through
periodic reassessment/systematic identification longitudinally should be a priority for healthcare professionals.
In contrast, individuals with mental, psychiatric and/or physical disorders, may present with
deterioration or improvement of cognition (due to changes in severity and nature of symptoms), while
Neuropsychological
Assessment and Financial
Capacity in Older Adults:
A Review Based on Up-to-Date Knowledge
Vaitsa Giannouli
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
22
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
others such as those with intellectual disabilities typically show a more stable pattern of marked deficits
not fluctuating over time (Giannouli, 2022a). Overall memory, attention, executive functions, problemsolving,
language, as well as sensory and perceptual capacities may diminish in older adults (Anderson,
2008; Glisky, 2007; Lezak et al., 2004).
The U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) defines financial capability as ‹‹a beneficiary’s ability
to manage or direct the management of his or her benefits›› (National Academies of Sciences Engineering
and Medicine, 2016) encompassing also ‹‹access to financial services, behavioral factors, social
influences, and emotions›› (Collins, 2013). Regarding the evaluation of financial capability, there is a
distinction between financial competence and financial performance. Financial performance is defined
as ‹‹an individual’s degree of success in handling financial demands in the context of the stresses, supports,
contextual cues, and resources in his/her actual environment›› thus emphasizing the real-world
functioning, while financial competence refers to ‹‹the financial skills one possesses, as demonstrated
through financial declarative and procedural knowledge (financial literacy) as well as financial judgment
(understanding, reasoning, and appreciation), typically assessed in a controlled (e.g., office or
other clinical) setting›› (National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine, 2016). Financial
competence has been also defined as ‹‹the capacity to manage money and financial assets in ways that
meet a person‘s needs and which are consistent with his/her values and self-interest›› (Lichtenberg,
Qualls, & Smyer, 2015). Financial capacity is also defined as ‹‹a range of conceptual, procedural, and
judgment skills›› (Sherod et al., 2009), thus, the terms financial capacity and financial competence can
be treated as interchangeable (Marson et al., 2013; Sherod et al., 2009) and of pivotal importance in the
neuropsychological assessment of the aging population (National Academies of Sciences Engineering
and Medicine, 2016).
Although, there is a plethora of findings supporting that objective cognitive changes do relate to
changes in financial skills (Widera et al., 2011), a few studies (except for the U.S.) investigate the management
of one’s finances, a very important instrumental activity of daily living (IADL) in older adults
with or without neurocognitive disorders. Nevertheless, direct influences of brain pathology have been
supported, and more specifically underlying brain differences in regions involved in socio-emotional
functioning (Spreng et al., 2017), as well as changes in left angular gyrus and amygdala have been supported
(Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2019a; Griffith et al., 2010; Nowrangi et al., 2022; Stoeckel et al., 2013)
along with the well-known frontal lobe lesions linkage to poorer performance in financial planning (Goel
et al., 1995). Also, metabolic abnormalities of posterior cortical paralimbic regions are correlated to the
degradation of financial abilities in mild Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) (Griffith et al., 2007).
For AD patients of all stages (mild, moderate, severe) (Giannouli, Stamovlasis & Tsolaki, 2018;
Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2021a; Martin et al., 2008), and preclinical AD (Marson, 2015), noticeable financial
capacity deficits are found even in the most basic financial activities based on the severity of the
cognitive deficits (Giannouli, Stamovlasis & Tsolaki, 2018; Martin et al., 2008). The same holds true for
Parkinson’s Disease with Dementia (PDD) (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2019b; Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2021b;
Martin et al., 2013), frontotemporal dementia (Giannouli et al., 2018; Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2021b; Gill
et al., 2019), Dementia with Lewy Bodies (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2016), vascular dementia (Giannouli
& Tsolaki, 2021c) and mixed dementia (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2023a). Financial capacity deficits are
also found in Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) both amenstic and non amnestic (Giannouli & Tsolaki,
2021d; Griffith et al., 2003; Triebel et al., 2009; 2010). It is of interest that in MCI patients, deficits in
cognitive domains such as attention and executive functioning have an influence on financial conceptual
knowledge, bank statement management, and bill payment (Okonkwo et al., 2006), while more time is
23
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
needed to complete financial tasks in patients compared to healthy controls (Giannouli, Stamovlasis, &
Tsolaki, 2018). Degraded financial skills are also found in cognitively-impaired patients with Multiple
Sclerosis, but their deficits are linked mainly to executive function and working memory deficits (Tracy et
al., 2017). In younger individuals, deficits are found in patients with schizophrenia (Niekawa et al., 2007),
bipolar disorder (Richardson, Jansen, & Fitch, 2018), and Traumatic Brain Injury (Dreer et al., 2012).
Nevertheless, attitudes and decisions made not only by laypeople, but also by healthcare and legal
experts towards financial capacity in older adults and older patients is highly impacted not only by objective
measurements and diagnoses, but also by social and cultural factors that are reflected on beliefs
and biases held regarding independence, protection and law (Giannouli, 2014; Giannouli et al., 2019).
The objectives of this chapter are three: 1) to present the theoretical-psychological models of financial
capacity assessment in old age, 2) to indentify the state-of-the-art regarding neuropsychological tools that
are in use in different countries and cultural contexts, and 3) to propose neuropsychological assessment
protocols that include all relevant factors that may have an impact on financial capacity.
THEORETICAL MODELS OF FINANCIAL CAPACITY
AND FINANCIAL EXPLOITATION IN OLD AGE
Financial capacity is a medico–legal construct representing an individual’s ability to independently
manage his/her own financial affairs in a manner that is consistent with personal self-interest and values
(Marson et al., 2012). Financial capacity is considered as multidimensional, given that it involves
a broad range of conceptual, pragmatic, and judgment abilities/skills across various everyday settings
(Darzins, Molloy, & Strang, 2004; Marson, 2013; Sherod et al., 2009), and as a result different aspects
of financial capacity/competence can be examined separately (Grisso, 1986; 2003). Among the many
proposed models, some highlight the importance of real-world applications (National Academies of
Sciences Engineering and Medicine, 2016) and the independence of the elderly patients (Marson et al.,
2000; National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine, 2016), while other proposed models
emphasize the need to examine the decision-making abilities as a fundamental skill at the basis of
financial capacity (Lai et al., 2008; Lichtenberg et al., 2015).
Although a naïf approach in the past was based solely on arithmetic/numerical/mathematical skills
for defining the psychological construct of financial capacity, a widely mentioned approach is based on
a conceptual model which includes three different levels, namely specific financial abilities (tasks), main
financial abilities (domains), and global financial ability (addition of the previous two) (Marson, 2010;
2016). This model groups these activities into two basic dimensions performance (e.g. counting coins,
paying bills) and judgment (e.g. make investments, choose the better offer). This can be defined as a
clearly cognitive approach, considering individuals to be just the sum of their cognitive abilities, something
that is not correct (Lichtenberg, 2015), with an overemphasis on scores about deficits, rather than
on the strengths, and with the person’s subjective experience remaining largely unexplored (Mast, 2011).
Another approach that attempts to fill in these gaps, has been proposed by Lichtenberg et al. (2016)
in the field of financial capacity and financial exploitation. It is focusing on ‹‹the older adult’s decisionmaking
process as it applies to a single financial decision the individual is considering (as opposed to a
hypothetical scenario, which has traditionally been used to assess financial competency)›› (Lichtenberg
et al., 2016). This is a person-centered approach that supports autonomy by spotting and building on the
individual’s strengths, while honoring his/her subjective values, preferences, and choices (Fazio, 2013).
24
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Additionally, it emphasizes on the decisional abilities by assessing the older adult’s understanding of the
actual financial decision that is in question, with the requirement that the older adult can communicate
four fundamentally important elements of his/her decision, such as choice, understanding, appreciation,
and reasoning (American Bar Association Commission on Law and Aging & American Psychological
Association, 2005; Appelbaum & Grisso, 1988; Lichtenberg et al., 2016).
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS FOR THE ASSESSMENT
OF FINANCIAL CAPACITY AND FINANCIAL EXPLOITATION
Standardized classic neuropsychological tests (measuring basic cognitive domains such as memory, language,
executive functions, etc.) are used in order to increase the reliability of the competence evaluation
procedures, but their ecological validity is not ensured, as they may not always predict directly everyday
functioning (American Bar Association Commission on Law and Aging and American Psychological
Association, 2008). As a result, the neuropsychological assessment procedures must be enriched with
other evaluation procedures, including global functional assessment and specific capacity evaluation
procedures regarding a specific legal question (Moye, 1996; Streisand & Spar, 2008; Wood, 2007).
Financial capacity and financial exploitation instruments are psychometric tools that are used in order
to evaluate financial decisional capacity (Drima, 2022). These instruments are designed to provide with
the minimum amount of inferences specific and direct answers to legal and clinical questions compared
to the classic neuropsychological tools measuring cognitive domains that are hypothesized to be predict
financial capacity (Archer, Stredny, & Zoby, 2006; Grisso, 2003). Although there is a plethora of relevant
neuropsychological tests that are in use in different countries, specifically targeting the older population,
four issues are of interest in the selection of these tests; a) the need for trained personnel regarding the
administration and scoring of the results, b) the easiness of administration, c) the standardization (which
is usually lacking for large sample sizes) and for different subgroups of older patients and healthy older
adults in different socio-cultural settings, and d) the interpretation of the results of the evaluation made
in different settings (e.g. daily geriatric clinics, care centers, courts etc.) with an emphasis not only on
diagnostics, but also on relevant interventions.
Several instruments have been proposed aiming specifically at financial capacity and financial exploitation,
which are considered to be two interconnected constructs, as the individuals who are characterized
as partially capable or incapable (e.g. MCI,, PDD, and AD patients) are at higher risk of financial
exploitation as well (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2019b; Griffith et al., 2003; Marson, 2013; Marson et al.,
2000). It is also of interest that there exist functional assessment instruments, that are already in use in
Europe and U.S., that include items relevant to financial abilities. For example, they may be measuring
directly arithmetic functions in financial contexts, such as the two standardized financial arithmetic
tasks from the Clinical Dementia Rating interview (CDR) which are presented orally (“How many 5
cent coins make up 1€?” and “How many 50 cent coins make up 15.50€?”) with answers obtained in a
verbal open response format assessed based on correctness (Morris, 1993). These two questions from
CDR have been used in Germany in financial capacity assessments (Loenneker et al., 2021).
In addition to that, the commonly used Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (Folstein & Folstein,
1975) as well as the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) (Nasreddine et al., 2005), both include
one item of subtraction of serial sevens (serial 100-7s subtraction), which has been found to best predict
financial capacity when measured with an additional specific financial capacity test in Greece (Giannouli
25
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
& Tsolaki, 2022d). The Functional Cognitive Assessment Scale (FUCAS), which is a cognitive-behavioral
scale that assesses executive function in daily life activities directly in patients with dementia in Greece
(Kounti et al., 2006), although it has been used as a screening tool for dementia, since it examines executive
functioning in daily life activities, it also evaluates the execution of six daily-life activities [medication
taking, financial management (shopping), clothing, washing, orientation, and communication] that
are deemed crucial for the safe and independent life of older individuals and it also evaluates cognitive
capabilities (problem comprehension, information processing in working memory, and planning) and
four parameters of executive function: time distribution between the steps required, sequence of steps,
accuracy of steps, and completeness of the activity (Kounti et al., 2006).
In Italy, the Numerical Activities of Daily Living - Financial (NADL-F) has been recently introduced
with domains such as counting currencies, reading abilities, item purchase, percentages, financial concepts,
bill payments, and financial judgments (Arcara et al., 2019). One of the major drawbacks of this
instrument is the small sample size of the participants and the overemphasis on mental calculations, that
renders this instrument appropriate for detecting deficits mainly in mathematical abilities.
WAIS-IV arithmetic subtest (as well as WAIS’s previous versions of arithmetic subtest) have been
also used across the world as intelligence tests have norms coming from large and diverse populations
and in this way they can serve psychological assessment with comparable results for the individual’s
performance. In experimental research, tests such as the Iowa Gambling Task, which requires simple
financial choices has also been used (Bechara et al., 1994). Finally, functional assessment scales among
which the widely used in Europe, Lawton – Brody Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scale (IADL)
includes a general item on how individuals handle finances with three corresponding levels, namely:
1) managing financial matters independently (e.g. budgets, writing checks, paying rent, bills, going to
bank) by collecting and keeping track of income, 2) managing day-to-day purchases, but in need of
help with banking, major purchases, or other activities, and 3) as being incapable of handling money
(Lawton & Brody, 1969).
Thus the above tests can be also used for obtaining relevant information from the older individuals
themselves or by asking family members, although the primary aim of these tests is not the complex
constructs of financial capacity/exploitation. Another point that needs to be raised here in contrast to
the abovementioned classic neuropsychological tests, is that most of the instruments used in forensic
settings that aim specifically financial capacity/exploitation were created, validated, and standardized
in the U.S. (Heilbronner, 2004; Heilbrun et al., 2003), thus not permitting cross-cultural comparisons
and generalization of results in broader non English-speaking settings.
Research articles indexed in PubMed and Google Scholar were searched by the end of October 2022,
in order to find relevant financial capacity and financial exploitation instruments with the following
terms-keywords: “Financial Capacity”, “Financial Competence”, “Financial Abilities”, “Financial Assessment”,
“Financial Management”, “Financial Skills”, “Financial Exploitation”, and terms focusing on
the age group of older adults: “Aged” OR “Older Adults” OR “Elderly” OR “Elders” OR “Mild Cognitive
Impairment” OR “Alzheimer Disease” OR “Dementia” OR “Neurocognitive Disorder”.
The articles that were included referred to abstracts and full articles published in English, regardless
of the nationality of the older populations under study, in an attempt to search available instruments
coming from different countries that examined different aspects of financial capacity, such as the ability
to manage finances, the ability to make informed financial decisions, as well as the ability to avoid
financial exploitation. The following instruments were found and are presented in alphabetical order.
26
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
The administration times are not reported as there is no such information for all the included instruments,
and times of completion greatly vary in older persons with different neurocognitive diagnoses.
Assessment of Capacity for Everyday Decision-Making (ACED)
ACED is a clinician-rated structured questionnaire used in the U.S., which consists of 7 items, designed
to assist clinicians in evaluating older adults’ everyday decision-making capacity. Although initially developed
for assessing decisions regarding medial management, a specific version of the ACED questionnaire
can be tailored to assess financial management-judgment (understanding, appreciation, reasoning,
expression of a choice) (Lai & Karlawish, 2007; Lai et al., 2008).
Clinician Assessment of Financial Incapability (CAFI)
CAFI consists of 32 items in a structured questionnaire rated by a clinician and examines financial
performance and financial judgment through spending, bill paying, management of funds, psychiatric
symptoms, and ability to avoid financial victimization (Black et al., 2014). In CAFI the clinician(s) are
asked to rate how well the individual has been meeting his/her basic needs, but this is done by the clinician
and it is not based on direct observation of the individual. Data come only from U.S. where the
questionnaire was developed and administered.
Financial Assessment and Capacity Test (FACT)
FACT was developed in Canada and aims at assessing several diverse domains-areas of specific difficulty
such as memory, reading, writing ability, calculation, daily financial tasks, general financial knowledge,
understanding assets, financial insight, financial confidence, and rational beliefs about money (Black et
al., 2007). FACT’s results are targeting at the development of intervention strategies tailored to the functional
needs of the older person by taking into consideration the four competence areas as proposed by
Appelbaum and Grisso (1988), namely understanding, appreciation, reasoning, and expressing a choice.
Three categorizations of total performance exist: “financially competent”, “financially incompetent,”
and “individuals with marginal financial capacity” (Black et al., 2007).
Financial Capacity Instrument (FCI) and Financial
Capacity Instrument Short Form (FCI-SF)
FCI is one of the most widely used instruments (based on the number of relevant publications that use
it or are based on its theoretical framework). It contains 9 domains relevant to financial cognition and
behavior, namely basic monetary skills, financial conceptual knowledge, cash transactions, checkbook
management, bank statement management, financial judgment, bill payment, knowledge of assets/estate,
and investment decision-making (Griffith et al., 2003; Marson et al., 2000; Marson, 2016). In basic monetary
skills, which is considered to be the only simple domain of FCI, individuals have to identify coins
and operate currency. In financial conceptual knowledge, individuals define simple financial concepts.
In cash transactions, individuals indentify the costs at grocery store with transactions regarding one to
three items. In checkbook management, a transaction paid by check is performed. In bank statement
management, the individual identifies transactions on a bank statement. In bill payment, the individual
27
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
explains the meaning and purpose of bills. In knowledge of personal assets, the individual explains
estate and investments, and in investment decisions, the understanding of the individual and making of
decisions is examined based on the output of his/her response. FCI classifies (older) individuals as capable,
marginally capable, or incapable based on cut-off scores for the American older population. FCI
examines directly the financial performance of the individual, and a brief form has been also proposed
for the American older adult population, that is Financial Capacity Instrument Short Form (FCI-SF)
(Gerstenecker et al., 2015).
Financial Competence Assessment Inventory (FCAI)
FCAI consists of 6 subscales (daily financial skills, financial discernment, wealth management, financial
skills related to cognitive functioning, debt management, support sources), which are evaluated both
as observed performance in tasks and with self-reports, while for some items information can also be
collected regarding understanding, appreciation, reasoning, and expressing a choice. Although it has
originally been used in Australia (Kershaw & Webber, 2008; Pachana et al., 2014), there are no proposed
cut-off scores for large samples of older adults as FCAI is intended to be used as a guide to determine the
strengths and/or weaknesses in particular areas. It is worth mentioning here, that a positive correlation
between the arithmetic score on the WAIS-III and FCAI, an assessment scale of financial competence
(Kershaw & Webber, 2008).
Financial Competence Assessment Tool (FCAT)
FCAT has been developed in Japan (Sakuraba et al., 2004) and consists of 6 subordinate domains of
financial competence, such as basic monetary skills, conceptual financial knowledge, use of banking
institution, cash transactions, financial discernment, understanding of receipts and expenses. FCAT has
demonstrated financial deficits in AD patients (Kumazawa et al., 2004), but also in younger patients
with schizophrenia (Niekawa et al., 2007).
Financial Decision-Making Questionnaire (FDMQ)
FDMQ has been developed and used in U.S. (Cole & Denburg, 2008). FDMQ is also a performancebased
instrument consisting of four scenarios examining 5 domains, namely Personal Finance, Impulse
Purchase, Low Precision Investment, and Financial Management, while the 4th scenario ends with
assessing Financial Behavior in the form of two 7-point Likert scales, in which the examinee indicates
how important making money and avoiding financial loss are to the individual’s decision-making process.
Thus, financial knowledge (the ability to describe the knowledge of facts and concepts related to
financial activities) and the ability to make relevant financial decisions are both examined as FDMQ
requires selecting and justifying financial choices across the four hypothetical scenarios in which participants
receive and have to process increasingly complex financial information (Cole & Denburg, 2008;
Shivapour et al., 2012).
28
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Financial Exploitation Vulnerability Scale (FEVS) and Financial
Exploitation Vulnerability Scale - Short Form (FEVS-SF)
FEVS (Lichtenbeg et al., 2021) and FEVS-SF both aim to detect financial exploitation (Campell & Lichtenberg,
2021) in the U.S. FEVS is web-based self-administered, and enables older adults to examine
their risk levels for financial exploitation as well as their current perceived financial vulnerability. FEVS
is also used on the website as the Financial Vulnerability Survey. FEVS measures 17 contextual items that
encompass financial strain, self-efficacy, financial behaviors, psychological vulnerability with respect
to finances, and conflicts and relationship strain related to finances.
Financial Incapability Structured Clinical Assessment
done Longitudinally (FISCAL)
FISCAL determines financial incapability and is focused on financial performance by examining whether
individuals have been spending their funds in ways that do not meet their basic needs or results in harm
to them (Lazar et al., 2016). Information comes from sources such as a semi-structured interview with
the individual, as well as information from client psychiatric health records, and treating clinician ratings
of the client. An integration of the three sources is accomplished, by reconciling discrepancies
between the sources of information. Four criteria for financial incapability are used: basic needs have
not been met AND funds needed for basic needs were spent on something else, substantial funds were
spent on something that harmed the client (e.g., on illicit drugs or alcohol), participant’s misspending
(not meeting basic needs or on harmful things) is likely to continue, and contextual factors are current
conditions that modify the impact or probability of misspending. Participants are determined financially
incapable and capable by the FISCAL (Lazar et al., 2016). It is worth mentioning that although data exist
for young and middle-aged adults with psychiatric diagnoses in U.S., no samples of older adults are
included (although this instrument could be used for this age group as well) and no direct assessment
of financial judgment is made.
Legal Capacity for Property Law Transactions Assessment Scale (LCPLTAS)
LCPLTAS is based on the theoretical framework proposed by Marson et al. (2000) with adjustments
for the Greek older population in the Greek language and Greek cultural-financial reality. LCPLTAS
consists of 7 main domains measuring directly basic monetary skills, cash transactions, bank statement
management, bill payment, financial conceptual knowledge, financial decision making, and knowledge
of personal assets (Giannouli, Stamovlasis, & Tsolaki, 2018; Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2014), but checkbook
management and investment decisions are not examined as in FCI as these two domains are considered
irrelevant for Greek older adults and their everyday life. Simple and complex tasks as in FCI as well as
hypothetical culture-appropriate financial transaction scenarios are used in order to assess and quantify
the ability to manipulate information rationally (compare and weigh the various risks and benefits associated
with different courses of financial action) through logical processes. For LCPLTAS there is
both a full as well as a short form, lasting half of the administration time, but with demonstrated reliability
and validity. Several studies have provided evidence for positive correlation between LCPLTAS
and MMSE total score (Giannouli, Stamovlasis, & Tsolaki, 2018; Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2019b; 2021a;
2021e; 2022b; 2022d; Stamovlasis et al., 2022). As in the case of FCI cut-off scores (only for the Greek
29
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
older population) have been proposed, and LCPLTAS classifies the (older) individuals as capable, marginally
capable, or incapable.
Lichtenberg Financial Decision Rating Scale (LFDRS), Lichtenberg
Financial Decision Rating Scale Short Form (LFDRS-SF) and
Financial Decision-Making Screening Scale (LFDSS)
LFDRS consists of 4 subscales: Financial situational awareness, Psychological vulnerability, Susceptibility
to undue influence, and Intellectual factors (i.e., decisional-ability factors) (Lichtenberg et al.,
2015). A shorter version of LFDRS is the 10-item LFDSS (Lichtenberg et al., 2016; 2017). Questions
related to choice, appreciation, understanding and rationale were all included in this screening scale. This
shorter instrument focuses on the decision-making abilities subscale, which assesses intellectual factors.
These are the functional abilities required for financial decision-making capacity, and include an older
adult’s ability to express a choice, communicate the rationale for the choice, demonstrate understanding
of the choice, and communicate appreciation of the relevant factors involved. Several items from the
Susceptibility to undue influence subscale of LFDSS are also included. A short form of the Lichtenberg
Financial Decision Rating Scale (LFDRS-SF) has also been suggested (Lichtenberg, Gross, & Campbell,
2020). Data for all these three versions exist for the American older population.
Money Mismanagement Measure (MMM)
MMM was developed in U.S. and consists of 28 items and is a self-report instrument assessing financial
judgment and secondarily performance. The domains that are included refer to questions on difficulties
meeting basic needs, budgeting, paying bills, keeping track of funds over past month, and assessing
financial situation (Conrad et al., 2006). Given that it is a self-report instrument, financial judgments
are not directly examined, thus rendering its use better as a screening tool, rather an objective measure
of financial decision-making.
Managing Money Scale (ILSMM)
ILSMM is one of the oldest performance-based assessment scales in the U.S. (Loeb, 1996). ILSMM
consists of 4 tasks, focusing on counting money, completing financial calculations, paying bills, and
taking precautions with money (Loeb, 1996; Mackin & Areán, 2009; Wood et al., 2014).
Measure of Awareness of Financial Skills (MAFS)
MAFS has been developed in Canada and consists of three parts, 1) participant questionnaire, 2) informant
questionnaire, and 3) performance measure. It is designed to measure awareness in financial management
domain (Cramer et al., 2004). The participant questionnaire contains questions about financial
management focusing on difficulty or need of help in performing certain financial tasks. The informant
questionnaire is an equivalent version of the participant questionnaire corroborating the gathered information.
The performance measure has 6 (equivalent to the abovementioned questionnaires) financial
tasks (e.g. identify and counting currency, cash transactions, writing checks, balancing checkbooks, and
comprehension of statements/bills) (Cramer et al., 2004; Van Wielingen et al., 2004).
30
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Older Adult Financial Exploitation Measure (OAFEM)
OAFEM has been also used in U.S. and examines 6 domains of financial exploitation, namely theft and
scams, abuse of trust, financial entitlement, coercion, signs of possible financial abuse, and difficulty
managing money. It takes the form of a questionnaire (yes/no responses), which is designed to assess
financial victimization of older adults falling in any of these 6 forms of financial exploitation (Conrad, et
al., 2010; Conrad et al., 2011). One of the major drawbacks of OAFEM is that it is a scale that measures
how much exploitation has taken place in the past, but it does not assess current performance-based
financial judgment or decision-making capacity, such as understanding the consequences of a pending
financial decision. Thus, older adults who are not aware that they are being victimized, due to emotional
manipulation and/or cognitive impairment, may not give an accurate self-report.
Semi-Structured Clinical Interview for Financial Capacity (SCIFC)
SCIFC is a clinician-oriented, semi-structured test that has been developed also by Marson et al., (2009)
in U.S., and it measures 7 relevant domains (basic monetary skills, financial conceptual knowledge, cash
transactions, checkbook management, bank statement management, financial judgment, bill payment,
plus one experimental domain that is knowledge of personal assets), thus excluding investment decisions
which is a domain included in FCI (Marson et al., 2009). It does not need a trained technician for
administration. A serious advantage of SCIFC is that it does not yield quantitative scores, but ratings
(capable, marginally capable or incapable).
Timeline Historical Review of Income and Financial Transactions (THRIFT)
THRIFT is a semi-structured interview that uses a calendar timeline follow-back method to elicit information
from individuals about their past month income, transactions or exchanges (such as letting a friend
stay in one’s apartment in return for the friend’s paying for food), expenditures, debts, and account balances,
which can be used to evaluate the individuals’ financial performance (Black et al., 2013). THRIFT
has been developed in U.S. may also tap into financial judgment in cases such as when an individual
may recall spending that was not in his or her best interests), but it is under question whether THRIFT
can detect individual’s ability to protect their own best interests in the case they do not self-report any
problems with their spending.
The Acreemagnosia Measurement (TAM)
TAM is a multi-items measure that examines loss of financial knowledge or acreemagnosia from the
ancient Greek ἀ- (a-, “lack of”), χρήμα (creema, “money”) and γνωσιακή (gnοsis, “knowledge”) (Κozlova
et al., 2019). More specifically, awareness of financial abilities and actual performance on the broad range
of everyday financial tasks is examined online in younger and older adults (Κozlova et al., 2019). One
major problem of this proposed instrument has been that it is used in a small sample from U.K., it is not
published in a peer-reviewed journal and the data are preliminary as presented in a Google Scholar entry.
31
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
PROPOSAL OF RELEVANT NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL
ASSESSMENT PROTOCOLS
Mental capacity assessment follows two approaches: 1) the diagnostic approach and 2) the functional
approach. The first one focuses on whether the person has a specific diagnosis (Moye & Marson, 2007),
something that tells us little about the individuals’ capacities in everyday settings or if the individual is
competent or incompetent regarding specific tasks instead of others (Peisah et al., 2009). This heterogeneity
in individual capacities and settings, makes the functional approach a better alternative.
According to the functional approach, in specific contexts and tasks, different abilities are required in
order to make a decision(s) (Grisso, 2003; Slovenko, 2006), thus the assessment of functional abilities
focuses on the functional characteristics, contextual components, causal, interactive, and judgmental/
dispositional components (Grisso, 2003). Although the diagnosis of a neurocognitive disorder does
have an overall negative impact on financial capacity (Pinsker et al., 2010), additional factors should be
taken into consideration in assessment protocols. For example, there is scientific literature supporting the
influences of past values and preferences that the individual holds about financial issues (Sahadevan et
al., 2003; Moye et al., 2005; Moberg & Rick, 2008). Unawareness of financial deficits in patients with
AD, frontotemporal dementia, and even MCI also shapes financial performance through overestimations/
underestimations made by the patients themselves (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2015; 2022a; 2022b; Okonkwo
et al., 2005; Wadley, Harrell, & Marson, 2003). The diminished self-awareness/metacognition, that is
the ability to evaluate one’s own cognitive performance as well as the ability to make adjustments in
response to provided feedback, has implications in daily living and relevant financial decisions (Lichtenberg,
2015). Therefore, relevant instruments based on self-reports must be used with caution and
performance-based measures should be preferred instead (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022a; 2022b; Moore
et al., 2007). This is a necessity especially in the case of unreliable information taking the form of misestimations
of financial capacity made, intentionally or unintentionally, by third-party non-professional
informants such as neighbors, friends, colleagues, caregivers and family members/relatives (Giannouli
& Tsolaki, 2022a; Pinsker et al., 2010; Wadley et al., 2003).
The influences of emotional functioning should be also added in relevant protocols (Pinsker et al.,
2010), as depressive symptomatology greatly impacts financial capacity performance in AD, MCI,
vascular dementia, and PDD (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2019b; 2021a; 2021c; 2021d) and deteriorates financial
capacity when overall cognitive performance also deteriorates in aMCI longitudinally (Giannouli,
Stamovlasis, & Tsolaki, 2022), especially when working memory declines (Earnst et al., 2001). This
negative impact of depression on financial capacity performance is not found for prior experience with
stressful life events (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2023b). Nevertheless, a study supports that executive functioning
and attention, but not depression severity, better predict financial capacity performance in older
adults with depressive symptomatology (Mackin & Areán, 2009). Negative affect without comorbid
depression should also be examined in assessment protocols as there are negative correlations between
financial capacity and negative affect even in cognitively intact older individuals (Giannouli & Tsolaki,
2022c). Also, anxiety but not depression has been found to predict financial capacity performance in
one study (Pachana et al. 2014), but this finding may be possibly reflecting the relatively low variance
of depressive symptoms in the assessed older sample (Pachana et al., 2014).
Apart from personality and emotional factors (Moberg & Rick, 2008), undue influence is considered
an important external factor for (financial) decisions of older adults, and the assessment of this vulnerability
involves careful evaluation of social cognition and emotional cognition in financial interactions,
32
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
personality traits, as well as metacognition (Lichtenberg, 2015; Plotkin, Spar & Horwitz, 2016; Quinn
et al., 2017). A relevant tool has been developed for undue influence assessment (California Undue
Influence Screening Tool, CUIST) for use by the Adult Protective Services (APS) as well as by other
professionals in U.S. (Quinn et al., 2017).
Another factor that should be incorporated in future assessment protocols is the education influences
as illiterate older MCI patients or MCI patients with fewer years of education and little prior financial
experience with relevant transactions suffer greater deficits in financial tasks and decisions compared
to MCI patients of a higher educational level (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2021e), and regardless of the basic
mathematical skills that may play the role of predictors (among other factors) for financial capacity
(Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022d; Martin et al., 2012, Sherod et al., 2009).
Although APOE ɛ4 gene has not been found to relate to financial capacity (Giannouli &Tsolaki, 2021f),
greater regional tau burden has been found to modestly associate with financial capacity impairment
in early-stage AD (Gonzalez et al., 2022). This finding has been supported also in prodromal and mild
stages of AD, for which an association can be claimed with the extent of cortical β-amyloid deposition,
while for normal older adults evidence of β-amyloid deposition is associated with slowing of financial
tasks (Giannouli &Tsolaki, submitted; Tolbert et al., 2019).
Measured frailty has been related to reduced financial capacity (Giannouli, 2022b). In addition to
that, financial capacity is highly correlated to performance regarding simple arithmetic abilities (such as
subtractions) (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022d) as indicated by brain regions (e.g. left angular gyrus), which
reflect a possible relevant biological substrate. Vascular burden is also having a detrimental effect on
financial capacity performance (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022e), while findings support that indices such
as sleep duration and sleep quality are directly linked to complex cognitive functions, such as financial
capacity both in aMCI as well as mild AD patients (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022f). In addition to that, in
MCI patients there seems to be a specific order of appearance of financial capacity deficits and more
specifically in financial capacity subdomains, such as Cash Transactions, Bank Statement Management,
and Financial Decision-Making are the first to be impacted (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2023c). Furthermore,
financial, social, and cultural aspects (Pinsker et al., 2010) have to be taken into consideration, as older
women are more easily declared ‘financially incapable’ compared to men with the same cognitive deficits
in cultural settings such as the modern Greek society (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022g), something that may
reveal possible biases during testing as well.
In addition to that, regardless of a possible neurocognitive disorder as a diagnosis, in some cultural
settings (e.g. Greek) compared to others (e.g. U.S.; Choi et al., 2019a; 2019b), older adults seem not be
involved at all in having a valid will, in assigning a durable power of attorney, and in having a written
living will (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022h), something that renders them more vulnerable to financial
exploitation. Also, in AD patients more financial altruism has been reported cross-culturally in two
countries (U.S.; Weissberger et al., 2022, and Greece; Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022i) compared to aMCI
patients and healthy controls (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022i). This may explain why older patients are more
vulnerable to undue influence (Peisah et al., 2009), when we also take into consideration that they do
not have a previous will-making pattern to compare with when a financial change is made (O’Neill &
Peisah, 2011). Undue influence(s) or coercion is difficult to prove in courts even with a detailed history
taking and collection of additional information from third-party sources (Posener & Jacoby, 2002), thus,
all the abovementioned provide evidence for the necessity for older patients, to include in assessment
protocols the examination of premorbid cognition, emotions, beliefs, values and preferences regarding
33
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
financial issues (Moye et al., 2005) not only by asking the individuals themselves, but also their family
members, caregivers, colleagues and friends (Marson et al., 2012).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
During COVID-19 pandemic and afterwards, the older population is increasingly facing the threat of
financial exploitation, thus rendering necessary not only the detection of financial (in)capacity, financial
exploitation and undue influences, but also the implementation of relevant interventions aiming at
individuals as well as healthcare professionals training in detecting and handling such cases, and society
as a whole (Giannouli & Tsolaki, 2022j).
A large impediment so far, not only cross-culturally, but also in assessments performed throughout
a specific country are the differences in the choice of administered instrument(s), and differences in the
collected information through history taking. Implementation of a specific tool into practice, policy,
procedures, and training of healthcare personnel depends on the reliability and validity of the proposed
instruments and the existence of psychometric cut-off scores coming from standardization research in
relevant large samples-populations for indentifying capacity status as objective reference points along
with qualitative data (Marson et al., 2000), and thus future work will need to address these issues. It is a
fact that no standard, widespread, detailed protocols are applied even to western countries with similar
sociocultural backgrounds throughout the European Union (E.U.), not only due to differences in the legal
systems and terminology, but also due to lack of research initiatives applying specific, routine protocols
to large populations of older adults with or without brain pathology (Alzheimer Europe, 2016). Therefore,
it is important that qualified mental health professionals (neuropsychologists, geropsychologists,
forensic psychologists and psychiatrists, neurologists, social workers etc.) carefully document the steps
and methods used in their evaluations (Sahadevan et al., 2003) and report the cognitive domain(s) affected,
the extent of the impairment(s), and the functional consequences of the impairment(s) (Sousa et
al., 2014), while research should aim at this critical gap between research and practice across linguistic,
cultural, medico-legal settings and cultures.
Another point for further consideration and research is that given that there is no gold standard clinical
assessment for determining financial (in)capacity and no universal standards for reporting financial
abuse especially in old age (Greene, 2022), there is a dire need to utilize a combination of traditional
interview, domain-specific instruments and neuropsychological testing (Wood et al., 2020) regarding
financial decision-making capacity in the aging adult population.
In addition to that, in our technology-driven world, the fact that more and more older adults immerse
in modern technologies, renders the development and administration of electronic financial instruments
that aim such new financial electronic capacities also a necessity, along with online assessment instruments
that are also needed in order to check older individuals at real time (Giannouli, 2017b; Green,
2022). In these assessments not only declarative knowledge, but also procedural knowledge reflecting
the ability to carry out motor-based, overlearned practical financial skills and routines other than the
traditional making of change and writing checks, have to be included such as the new online banking
procedures (Marson et al., 2000; Moye & Marson, 2007). As the existing assessment tools (questionnaires
or tests) are all paper-and-pencil and are not up-to-date regarding new financial threats/risks
(financial cybercrime/cyberfraud) encountered in such procedures in the virtual world (Green, 2022), a
new perspective can be given by electronic versions of existing tests and questionnaires, as well as the
34
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
adaptation of E-relevant assessment protocols in order to go to remote, unsupervised, and online use
of new instruments. For example, relevant performance-based instruments are the Financial Capacity
Instrument-Short Form (FCI-SF), called eFCI (Howell et al., 2022), as well as the proposed but still not
administered and validated to older adults, Electronic Financial Instrument Screening Tool (EFIST),
which is a 24-item questionnaire aiming to aid in identifying potential vulnerabilities for elder financial
abuse (Greene, 2022).
CONCLUSION
Younger and older adults are presumed to have capacity to make financial decisions for themselves, but
this capacity may, temporarily or permanently, be lost, due to illness or accident (Darzins et al., 2004).
If financial and decision-making capacity is diminished or lost while the older individual has access to
money/property, others need to recognize this, and take appropriate steps to prevent financial exploitation,
usually with the appointment of a legal guardian/representative. Nevertheless, having a representative
appointed to manage an older person’s financial affairs is considered to have positive effects on the beneficiary,
but is still risky for financial abuse, paternalistic as it encourages dependence, it is not minimally
restrictive, and may be stigmatizing for the elder and his/her family (Dixon et al., 1999; Elbogen et al.,
2008; Giannouli, 2014), thus supported decision-making could be an alternative patient-centered approach
that enables and encourages people to play a role in the management of their own finances (National
Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine, 2016). Although there is relevant research and data
coming from different cultural settings and assessment instruments, still there is no comparison between
all these approaches in understanding and assessing financial capacity/exploitation. Therefore, this lack
of a unified approach in the form of a multidimensional protocol-algorithm that includes and combines
all relevant aspects of financial capacity/exploitation, best practices, guidelines and methodologies, is
rendering it difficult not only to provide practical advice to laypeople across different countries, but also
renders communication across professionals impossible in the same cultural settings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Fulbright Foundation in Greece.
REFERENCES
Alzheimer Europe. (2016). Decision making and legal capacity in dementia. Country comparisons.
Alzheimer Europe.
American Bar Association Commission on Law and Aging & American Psychological Association.
(2005). Assessment of older adults with diminished capacity: A handbook for psychologists. American
Bar Association and American Psychological Association.
35
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
American Bar Association Commission on Law and Aging and American Psychological Association.
(2008). Assessment of older adults with diminished capacity: A handbook for psychologists. American
Bar Association and American Psychological Association.
Anderson, E. (2008). Cognitive change in old age. In R. Jacoby, C. Oppenheimer, T. Dening, & A.
Thomas (Eds.), Oxford textbook of old age psychiatry (pp. 33–50). Oxford University Press.
Appelbaum, P. S., & Grisso, T. (1988). Assessing patients’ capacities to consent to treatment. The New
England Journal of Medicine, 319(25), 1635–1638. doi:10.1056/NEJM198812223192504 PMID:3200278
Arcara, G., Burgio, F., Benavides-Varela, S., Toffano, R., Gindri, P., Tonini, E., Meneghello, F., & Semenza,
C. (2019). Numerical Activities of Daily Living - Financial (NADL-F): A tool for the assessment
of financial capacities. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 29(7), 1062–1084. doi:10.1080/09602011.
2017.1359188 PMID:28880732
Archer, R. P., Stredny, R. V., & Zoby, M. (2006). Introduction to forensic uses of clinical assessment
instruments. In R. P. Archer (Ed.), Forensic uses of clinical assessment instruments (pp. 1–18). Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences
following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50(1-3), 7–15. doi:10.1016/0010-
0277(94)90018-3 PMID:8039375
Black, A. C., McMahon, T. J., Rosenheck, R. A., Ball, S. A., Ries, R. K., Ames, D., & Rosen, M. I.
(2014). Development of the Clinician Assessment of Financial Incapability (CAFI). Psychiatry Research,
215(3), 784–789. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2014.01.021 PMID:24495575
Black, E. L., Ross, T. J., Flanagan, T., Rabheru, K., & Breiter, H. J. (2007). A Financial Assessment &
Capacity Test (FACT) for a psychogeriatric population: Development and concurrent validity. Research
Insights of the Regional Mental Health Care.
Campbell, R. J., & Lichtenberg, P. A. (2021). A Short Form of the Financial Exploitation Vulnerability
Scale. Clinical Gerontologist, 44(5), 594–603. doi:10.1080/07317115.2020.1836108 PMID:33124959
Choi, S. L., Kim, M., & McDonough, I. M. (2019). Do older adults with Alzheimer’s disease engage in
estate planning and advance care planning preparation? Aging & Mental Health, 23(7), 872–879. doi:1
0.1080/13607863.2018.1461192 PMID:29667427
Choi, S. L., McDonough, I. M., Kim, M., & Kim, G. (2019). Estate planning among older Americans: The
moderating role of race and ethnicity. Financial Planning Review, 2(3–4), e1058. doi:10.1002/cfp2.1058
Collins, J. M. (2013). Analyzing the financial capability of people in Wisconsin. Issue Briefs: Family
Financial Education, 2013-04.
Conrad, K. J., Iris, M., Ridings, J. W., Fairman, K. P., Rosen, A., & Wilber, K. H. (2011). Conceptual
model and map of financial exploitation of older adults. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 23(4),
304–325. doi:10.1080/08946566.2011.584045 PMID:21978290
36
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Conrad, K. J., Iris, M., Ridings, J. W., Langley, K., & Wilber, K. H. (2010). Self-report measure of
financial exploitation of older adults. The Gerontologist, 50(6), 758–773. doi:10.1093/geront/gnq054
PMID:20667945
Conrad, K. J., Matters, M. D., Luchins, D. J., Hanrahan, P., Quasius, D. L., & Lutz, G. (2006). Development
of a money mismanagement measure and cross-validation due to suspected range restriction.
Journal of Applied Measurement, 7(2), 206–224. PMID:16632903
Darzins, P., Molloy, W., & Strang, D. (2004). Who can decide?: The six step capacity assessment process.
Memory Australia Press.
Dixon, L., Turner, J., Krauss, N., Scott, J., & McNary, S. (1999). Case managers’ and clients’ perspectives
on a representative payee program. Psychiatric Services (Washington, D.C.), 50(6), 781–786.
doi:10.1176/ps.50.6.781 PMID:10375147
Dreer, L. E., DeVivo, M. J., Novack, T. A., & Marson, D. C. (2012). Financial capacity following traumatic
brain injury: A six-month longitudinal study. Rehabilitation Psychology, 57(1), 5–12. doi:10.1037/
a0025818 PMID:22369113
Drima, E. P. (2022). Routine use of financial capacity instruments for clinical decisional capacity testing:
A scoping review.
Earnst, K. S., Wadley, V. G., Aldridge, T. M., Steenwyk, A. B., Hammond, A. E., Harrell, L. E., &
Marson, D. C. (2001). Loss of financial capacity in Alzheimer’s disease: The role of working memory.
Neuropsychology, Development, and Cognition. Section B, Aging, Neuropsychology and Cognition, 8(2),
109–119. doi:10.1076/anec.8.2.109.839
Elbogen, E. B., Wilder, C., Swartz, M. S., & Swanson, J. W. (2008). Caregivers as money managers
for adults with severe mental illness: How treatment providers can help. Academic Psychiatry, 32(2),
104–110. doi:10.1176/appi.ap.32.2.104 PMID:18349329
Fazio, S. (2013). The individual is the core and key to person-centered care. Generations (San Francisco,
Calif.), 37(3), 16–22.
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975). “Mini-mental state”: A practical method for
grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12(3), 189–198.
doi:10.1016/0022-3956(75)90026-6 PMID:1202204
Giannouli, V. (2014). What do Greeks believe about elders and mental capacity. AGORA International
Journal of Juridical Sciences, 3(3), 1–5. doi:10.15837/aijjs.v8i3.1446
Giannouli, V. (2016). Crime and legal issues among intellectually disabled individuals. In R. Gopalan
(Ed.), Handbook of research on diagnosing, treating, and managing intellectual disabilities (pp. 346–369).
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0089-6.ch018
Giannouli, V. (2017a). Alzheimer’s disease: Psychosocial dimensions of a modern plague. Encephalos,
54, 33–38.
Giannouli, V. (2017b). What is the next small big thing in psychology? Psychological Thought, 10(1),
1–6. doi:10.5964/psyct.v10i1.215
37
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Giannouli, V. (2018). Elder abuse and consent capacity: Our collective nemesis? In R. Gopalan (Ed.), Social,
psychological, and forensic perspectives on sexual abuse (pp. 207–221). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-3958-2.ch015
Giannouli, V. (2019). Judging Antigone in old age: (Neuro) psychology and law in the twenty‐first
century. Problems of Psychology in the 21st Century, 3, 72-74.
Giannouli, V. (2020). Et in Arcadia ego. Philosophy Now, 138, 32–33.
Giannouli, V. (2022a). Reflecting on crime and legal issues in people with intellectual disabilities: Theory,
perspectives, and future approaches. In R. Gopalan (Ed.), Research anthology on physical and intellectual
disabilities in an inclusive society (pp. 1539–1567). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-6684-3542-7.ch081
Giannouli, V. (2022b). Does higher prevalence of frailty in Greek older community-dwelling women
also relate to higher prevalence of perceived financial exploitation? A new question to ponder upon. The
Journal of Frailty & Aging, 11(4), 436–437. PMID:36346732
Giannouli, V. (2022c). Elder abuse and victims with disabilities. In R. T. Gopalan (Ed.), Victimology
(pp. 313–339). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-12930-8_14
Giannouli, V., Stamovlasis, D., & Tsolaki, M. (2018). Exploring the role of cognitive factors in a new
instrument for elders’ financial capacity assessment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 62(4), 1579–1594.
doi:10.3233/JAD-170812 PMID:29504530
Giannouli, V., Stamovlasis, D., & Tsolaki, M. (2022). Longitudinal study of depression on amnestic
mild cognitive impairment and financial capacity. Clinical Gerontologist, 45(3), 708–714. doi:10.1080
/07317115.2021.2017377 PMID:34983334
Giannouli, V., Tegos, T., Zilakaki, M., & Tsolaki, M. (2019). Elders and mental capacity: Using a qualitative
approach to examine views on independence and protection across the Balkans. Hellenic Journal
of Nuclear Medicine, 22, 122–139. PMID:31802052
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2014). Legal capacity of the elderly in Greece. Hellenic Journal of Nuclear
Medicine, 17, 2–6. PMID:24392459
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2015). A neglected drama for elders: Discrepancy between self-perception
and objective performance regarding financial capacity in patients with cognitive deficits. Psychological
Thought, 8(2), 142–147. doi:10.5964/psyct.v8i2.130
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2016). Questions about dementia with Lewy bodies, personal beliefs and
real performance for financial capacity tasks. European Psychiatry, 33(S1), S469–S470. doi:10.1016/j.
eurpsy.2016.01.1712
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2019a). Are left angular gyrus and amygdala volumes important for
financial capacity in mild cognitive impairment? Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 22, 160–164.
PMID:30877733
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2019b). Depression and financial capacity assessment in Parkinson’s
disease with dementia: Overlooking an important factor?. Psychiatrike= Psychiatriki, 30(1), 66-70.
38
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021a). Mild Alzheimer Disease, financial capacity, and the role of depression:
Eyes wide shut? Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 35(4), 360–362. doi:10.1097/
WAD.0000000000000427 PMID:33443873
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021b). Is depression or apathy playing a key role in predicting financial
capacity in Parkinson’s Disease with Dementia and Frontotemporal Dementia? Brain Sciences, 11(6),
785. doi:10.3390/brainsci11060785 PMID:34198487
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021c). Vascular dementia, depression, and financial capacity assessment.
Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 35(1), 84–87. doi:10.1097/WAD.0000000000000374
PMID:32366802
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021d). Unraveling Ariadne’s thread into the labyrinth of aMCI: Depression
and financial capacity. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 35(4), 363–365. doi:10.1097/
WAD.0000000000000417 PMID:33136558
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021e). Financial capacity and illiteracy: Does education matter in amnestic
Mild Cognitive Impairment? Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 5(1), 715–719. doi:10.3233/
ADR-210033 PMID:34755045
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021f). APOE ɛ4 allele and financial capacity performance in Mild Alzheimer’s
Disease: A pilot study. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 5(1), 93–97. doi:10.3233/
ADR-200254 PMID:33681721
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022a). Frontotemporal dementia and financial capacity: Facing
the Cerberus of overestimation or underestimation? Australasian Psychiatry, 30(1), 41–43.
doi:10.1177/10398562211005444 PMID:33818175
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022b). Self-awareness of cognitive efficiency, cognitive status, insight,
and financial capacity in patients with mild AD, aMCI, and healthy controls: An intriguing liaison
with clinical implications? Neurology International, 14(3), 628–637. doi:10.3390/neurolint14030051
PMID:35997360
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022c). Is negative affect associated with deficits in financial capacity in
nondepressed older adults? A preliminary study. Journal of Affective Disorders Reports, 10, 100391.
doi:10.1016/j.jadr.2022.100391
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022d). Financial incapacity of patients with mild Alzheimer’s Disease:
What neurologists need to know about where the impairment lies. Neurology International, 14(1), 90–98.
doi:10.3390/neurolint14010008 PMID:35076597
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022e). Liberating older adults from the bonds of vascular risk factors:
What is their impact on financial capacity in amnestic mild cognitive impairment? Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 76(6), 246–250. doi:10.1111/pcn.13348 PMID:35262231
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022f). (in press). In the hands of Hypnos: Associations between sleep,
cognitive performance and financial capacity in aMCI and mild AD. Sleep Science.
39
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022g). What biological factors, social determinants, and psychological
and behavioral symptoms of patients with mild Alzheimer’s Disease correlate with caregiver estimations
of financial capacity? Bringing biases against older women into focus. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
Reports, 6(1), 503–507. doi:10.3233/ADR-220037 PMID:36186725
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022h). Neuropsychological performance and engagement in estate
planning and advance care planning preparation of patients with neurocognitive disorders and healthy
older adults: Is the situation alarming or reassuring in Greece? Gerontology & Geriatric Medicine, 8,
23337214221119053. doi:10.1177/23337214221119053 PMID:36046580
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022i). Neurocognitive disorders and financial capacity: A few steps away
for financial generosity and self-justification statements to be used in the diagnosis of brain pathology in
old age? Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 77(1), 56–57. doi:10.1111/pcn.13493 PMID:36256510
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022j). Elder financial abuse and the COVID-19 pandemic: A call to action
through training programmes?. Psychiatrike= Psychiatriki, 33(4), 333-334.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2023a). Beneath the top of the iceberg: Financial capacity deficits in mixed
dementia with and without depression. Health Care, 11(4), 505. PMID:36833039
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2023b). Stressful life events, general cognitive performance, and financial
capacity in healthy older adults and Alzheimer’s disease patients. Neuropsychiatrie.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2023c). Is there a specific order of appearance of financial capacity deficits
across neurocognitive disorders? What comes first and what should be treated. International Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 38(2), e5880. doi:10.1002/gps.5880 PMID:36710426
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. How well do amyloid β peptide 1–42 (Aβ42), total tau and phosphorylated
tau concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid predict financial capacity in dementia? Submitted.
Gill, S., Blair, M., Kershaw, M., Jesso, S., MacKinley, J., Coleman, K., Pantazopoulos, K., Pasternak, S.,
& Finger, E. (2019). Financial capacity in frontotemporal dementia and related presentations. Journal
of Neurology, 266(7), 1698–1707. doi:10.100700415-019-09317-w PMID:31011799
Glisky, E. L. (2007). Changes in cognitive function in human aging. In D. R. Riddle (Ed.), Brain aging:
Models, methods, and mechanisms (pp. 4–20). CRC Press.
Goel, V., Grafman, J., Sadato, N., & Hallett, M. (1995). Modeling other minds. Neuroreport, 6(13),
1741–1746. doi:10.1097/00001756-199509000-00009 PMID:8541472
Gonzalez, C., Tommasi, N. S., Briggs, D., Properzi, M. J., Amariglio, R. E., & Marshall, G. A. (2021).
Financial capacity and regional cerebral Tau in cognitively normal older adults, Mild Cognitive Impairment,
and Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 79(3), 1133–1142. doi:10.3233/
JAD-201122 PMID:33386806
Greene, A. J. (2022). Elder financial abuse and electronic financial instruments: Present and future
considerations for financial capacity assessments. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 30(1),
90–106. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2021.02.045 PMID:33781661
40
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Sicola, A., Krzywanski, S., Zamrini, E., Harrell, L., & Marson, D. C. (2003).
Impaired financial abilities in mild cognitive impairment: A direct assessment approach. Neurology,
60(3), 449–457. doi:10.1212/WNL.60.3.449 PMID:12578926
Griffith, H. R., Okonkwo, O. C., Den Hollander, J. A., Belue, K., Lanza, S., Harrell, L. E., Brockington,
J. C., Clark, D. G., & Marson, D. C. (2007). Brain Proton MRS is correlated with financial abilities in
patients with Alzheimer’s Disease. Brain Imaging and Behavior, 1(1), 23–29. doi:10.100711682-007-
9002-3
Griffith, H. R., Stewart, C. C., Stoeckel, L. E., Okonkwo, O. C., den Hollander, J. A., Martin, R. C.,
Belue, K., Copeland, J. N., Harrell, L. E., Brockington, J. C., Clark, D. G., & Marson, D. C. (2010).
Magnetic resonance imaging volume of the angular gyri predicts financial skill deficits in people with
amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 58(2), 265–274.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02679.x PMID:20374402
Grisso, T. (1986). Evaluating competencies: Forensic assessments and instruments. Perspectives in law
& psychology (Vol. 7). Plenum Press. doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-5046-8
Grisso, T. (2003). Evaluating competencies: Forensic assessments and instruments. Kluwer.
Heilbronner, R. L. (2004). A status report on the practice of forensic neuropsychology. The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 18(2), 312–326. doi:10.1080/13854040490501574 PMID:15587677
Heilbrun, K., Marczyk, G. R., DeMatteo, D., Zillmer, E. A., Harris, J., & Jennings, T. (2003). Principles
of forensic mental health assessment: Implications for neuropsychological assessment in forensic contexts.
Assessment, 10(4), 329–343. doi:10.1177/1073191103258591 PMID:14682479
Howell, T., Gummadi, S., Bui, C., Santhakumar, J., Knight, K., Roberson, E. D., Marson, D., Chambless,
C., Gersteneker, A., Martin, R., Kennedy, R., Zhang, Y., Morris, J. C., Moulder, K. L., Mayo, C., Carroll,
M., Li, Y., Petersen, R. C., Stricker, N. H., & Weiner, M. W. (2022). Development and implementation
of an electronic Clinical Dementia Rating and Financial Capacity Instrument-Short Form. Alzheimer’s
& Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring, 14(1), e12331. doi:10.1002/dad2.12331
PMID:35898521
Kounti, F., Tsolaki, M., & Kiosseoglou, G. (2006). Functional cognitive assessment scale (FUCAS):
A new scale to assess executive cognitive function in daily life activities in patients with dementia
and mild cognitive impairment. Human Psychopharmacology, 21(5), 305–311. doi:10.1002/hup.772
PMID:16856217
Kozlova, I., Booth, T., Parra Rodriguez, M., & Della Sala, S. (2019) The Acreemagnosia Measurement:
Psychometric evaluation of a new assessment of the loss of financial knowledge. Working Paper,
PsyArXiv, Ithaca, N.Y.
Kumazawa, Y., Matsuda, O., & Sakuraba, Y. (2004). Relationship between financial competency and
cognitive function inpatients with Alzheimer’s disease: Examination by using Financial Competency
Assessment Tool (FCAT). Japanese Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15, 1177–1185.
41
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Lai, J. M., Gill, T. M., Cooney, L. M., Bradley, E. H., Hawkins, K. A., & Karlawish, J. H. (2008). Everyday
decision-making ability in older persons with cognitive impairment. The American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(8), 693–696. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e31816c7b54 PMID:18669948
Lai, J. M., & Karlawish, J. (2007). Assessing the capacity to make everyday decisions: A guide for clinicians
and an agenda for future research. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(2), 101–111.
doi:10.1097/01.JGP.0000239246.10056.2e PMID:17272730
Lawton, M. P., & Brody, E. M. (1969). Assessment of older people: Self-maintaining and instrumental
activities of daily living. The Gerontologist, 9(3 Part 1), 179–186. doi:10.1093/geront/9.3_Part_1.179
PMID:5349366
Lazar, C. M., Black, A. C., McMahon, T. J., Rosenheck, R. A., Ries, R., Ames, D., & Rosen, M. I. (2016).
All-data approach to assessing financial capability in people with psychiatric disabilities. Psychological
Assessment, 28(4), 362–371. doi:10.1037/pas0000179 PMID:26146947
Lezak, M. D., Howieson, D. B., Loring, D. W., & Fischer, J. S. (2004). Neuropsychological assessment.
Oxford University Press.
Lichtenberg, P. A. (2015). Financial decision making in the midst of cognitive decline. Presentation to
the Committee to Evaluate the Social Security Administration’s Capability Determination Process for
Adult Beneficiaries, Washington DC, USA.
Lichtenberg, P. A., Ficker, L., Rahman-Filipiak, A., Tatro, R., Farrell, C., Speir, J. J., Mall, S. J., Simasko,
P., Collens, H. H., & Jackman, J. D. (2016). The Lichtenberg Financial Decision Screening Scale (LFDSS):
A new tool for assessing financial decision making and preventing financial exploitation. Journal of
Elder Abuse & Neglect, 28(3), 134–151. doi:10.1080/08946566.2016.1168333 PMID:27010780
Lichtenberg, P. A., Gross, E., & Campbell, R. (2020). A short form of the Lichtenberg Financial Decision
Rating Scale. Clinical Gerontologist, 43(3), 256–265. doi:10.1080/07317115.2018.1527424
PMID:30321125
Lichtenberg, P. A., Qualls, S. H., & Smyer, M. A. (2015). Competency and decision-making capacity:
Negotiating health and financial decision making. In P. A. Lichtenberg, B. T. Mast, B. D. Carpenter, &
J. Wetherell (Eds.), APA handbook of clinical geropsychology, Vol. 2: Assessment, treatment, and issues
of later life. (pp. 553–578). Washington: American Psychological Association.
Lichtenberg, P. A., Stoltman, J., Ficker, L. J., Iris, M., & Mast, B. (2015). A person-centered approach
to financial capacity assessment: Preliminary development of a new rating scale. Clinical Gerontologist,
38(1), 49–67. doi:10.1080/07317115.2014.970318 PMID:25866438
Lichtenberg, P.A., Teresi, J.A., Ocepek-Welikson, K., & Eimicke, J.P. (2017). Reliability and validity of
the Lichtenberg Financial Decision Screening Scale. Innovations in Aging, 1, 1(1), igx003.
Lichtenberg. P.A., Tocco, M., Moray, J., & Hal,l L. (2021). Examining the validity of the Financial
Exploitation Vulnerability Scale. Clinical Gerontologist, 44(5), 585-593.
Loeb, P. A. (1996). Independent Living Scales: Additional record forms. Psychological Corp.
42
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Loenneker, H. D., Becker, S., Nussbaum, S., Nuerk, H.-C., & Liepelt-Scarfone, I. (2021). Arithmetic
errors in financial contexts in Parkinson’s Disease. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 629984. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2021.629984 PMID:33935881
Mackin, R. S., & Areán, P. A. (2009). Impaired financial capacity in late life depression is associated
with cognitive performance on measures of executive functioning and attention. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, 15(5), 793–798. doi:10.1017/S1355617709990300 PMID:19635176
Marroni, S. P., Radaelli, G., Silva, I. G. D., & Portuguez, M. W. (2017). Instruments for evaluating financial
management capacity among the elderly: An integrative literature review. Revista Brasileira de
Geriatria e Gerontologia, 20(4), 582–593. doi:10.1590/1981-22562017020.160207
Marson, D. (2015). Investigating functional impairment in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. The Journal
of Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease, 2(1), 4. doi:10.14283/jpad.2015.44 PMID:26855935
Marson, D. (2016). Conceptual models and guidelines for clinical assessment of financial capacity.
Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 31(6), 541–553. doi:10.1093/arclin/acw052 PMID:27506235
Marson, D. C. (2013). Clinical and ethical aspects of financial capacity in dementia: A commentary.
The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(4), 382–390. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.033
PMID:23498385
Marson, D. C., Sawrie, S. M., Snyder, S., McInturff, B., Stalvey, T., Boothe, A., Aldridge, T., Chatterjee,
A., & Harrell, L. E. (2000). Assessing financial capacity in patients with Alzheimer disease:
A conceptual model and prototype instrument. Archives of Neurology, 57(6), 877–884. doi:10.1001/
archneur.57.6.877 PMID:10867786
Marson, D. C., Triebel, K. L., & Knight, A. J. (2012). Assessment of financial capacity: A neuropsychological
perspective. In G. J. Demakis (Ed.), Civil capacities in clinical neuropsychology (pp. 39–68).
Oxford University Press.
Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Harrell, L., Zamrini, E., Anderson, B., Bartolucci, A., & Marson,
D. (2008). Declining financial capacity in patients with mild Alzheimer disease: A one-year longitudinal
study. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(3), 209–219. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e318157cb00
PMID:18263665
Martin, R. C., Triebel, K. L., Kennedy, R. E., Nicholas, A. P., Watts, R. L., Stover, N. P., Brandon, M.,
& Marson, D. C. (2013). Impaired financial abilities in Parkinson’s disease patients with mild cognitive
impairment and dementia. Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, 19(11), 986–990. doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.
2013.06.017 PMID:23899743
Mast, B. T. (2011). Whole person dementia assessment. Health Professions Press, Inc.
Moberg, P. J., & Rick, J. H. (2008). Decision-making capacity and competency in the elderly: A clinical
and neuropsychological perspective. NeuroRehabilitation, 23(5), 403–413. doi:10.3233/NRE-2008-
23504 PMID:18957727
43
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Moore, D. J., Palmer, B. W., Patterson, T. L., & Jeste, D. V. (2007). A review of performance-based
measures of functional living skills. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 41(1-2), 97–118. doi:10.1016/j.
jpsychires.2005.10.008 PMID:16360706
Moye, J. (1996). Theoretical frameworks for competency in cognitively impaired elderly adults. Journal
of Aging Studies, 10(1), 27–42. doi:10.1016/S0890-4065(96)90015-8
Moye, J., Armesto, J. C., & Karel, M. J. (2005). Evaluating capacity of older adults in rehabilitation
settings: Conceptual models and clinical challenges. Rehabilitation Psychology, 50(3), 207–214.
doi:10.1037/0090-5550.50.3.207
Moye, J., & Marson, D. C. (2007). Assessment of decision-making capacity in older adults: An emerging
area of practice and research. The Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and
Social Sciences, 62(1), 3–P11. doi:10.1093/geronb/62.1.P3 PMID:17284555
Nasreddine, Z. S., Phillips, N. A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I., & Chertkow,
H. (2005). The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for Mild Cognitive Impairment.
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(4), 695–699. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x
PMID:15817019
National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. (2016). Informing social security’s process
for financial capability determination (P. S. Appelbaum, C. M. Spicer, & F. R. Valliere, Eds.). National
Academies Press.
Niekawa, N., Sakuraba, Y., Uto, H., Kumazawa, Y., & Matsuda, O. (2007). Relationship between financial
competence and cognitive function in patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
61(5), 455–461. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1819.2007.01693.x PMID:17875022
Nowrangi, M. A., Outen, J. D., Naaz, F., Chen, L., Bakker, A., Munro, C. A., & Rosenberg, P. B. (2022).
Altered angular gyrus resting state functional connectivity associated with financial capacity in Mild
Cognitive Impairment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 1-9.
O’Neill, N., & Peisah, C. (2011). Capacity and the law. Sydney University Press.
Okonkwo, O. C., Wadley, V. G., Griffith, H. R., Ball, K., & Marson, D. C. (2006). Cognitive correlates
of financial abilities in mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 54(11),
1745–1750. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00916.x PMID:17087703
Okonkwo, O. C., Wadley, V. G., Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Lanza, S., Zamrini, E. Y., Harrell, L. E., Brockington,
J. C., Clark, D., Raman, R., & Marson, D. C. (2008). Awareness of deficits in financial abilities
in patients with mild cognitive impairment: Going beyond self-informant discrepancy. The American
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(8), 650–659. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e31817e8a9d PMID:18669943
Pachana, N. A., Byrne, G. J., Wilson, J., Tilse, C., Pinsker, D. M., Massavelli, B., Vearncombe, K. J.,
& Mitchell, L. K. (2014). Predictors of financial capacity performance in older adults using the Financial
Competence Assessment Inventory. International Psychogeriatrics, 26(6), 921–927. doi:10.1017/
S1041610214000209 PMID:24571738
44
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Peisah, C., Forlenza, O., & Chiu, E. (2009). Ethics, capacity, and decision-making in the practice of old
age psychiatry: An emerging dialogue. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 22(6), 519–521. doi:10.1097/
YCO.0b013e32833058e3 PMID:19654546
Pinsker, D. M., Pachana, N. A., Wilson, J., Tilse, C., & Byrne, G. J. (2010). Financial capacity in older
adults: A review of clinical assessment approaches and considerations. Clinical Gerontologist, 33(4),
332–346. doi:10.1080/07317115.2010.502107
Pinsker, D. M., Pachana, N. A., Wilson, J., Tilse, C., & Byrne, G. J. (2010). Financial capacity in older
adults: A review of clinical assessment approaches and considerations. Clinical Gerontologist, 33(4),
332–346. doi:10.1080/07317115.2010.502107
Plotkin, D. A., Spar, J. E., & Horwitz, H. L. (2016). Assessing undue influence. The Journal of the
American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 44, 344–351. PMID:27644868
Posener, H. D., & Jacoby, R. (2002). Testamentary capacity. In R. Jacoby & C. Oppenheimer (Eds.),
Psychiatry in the elderly (pp. 932–940). Oxford University Press.
Quinn, M. J., Nerenberg, L., Navarro, A. E., & Wilber, K. H. (2017). Developing an undue influence
screening tool for Adult Protective Services. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 29(2-3), 157–185. doi
:10.1080/08946566.2017.1314844 PMID:28398137
Richardson, T., Jansen, M., & Fitch, C. (2018). Financial difficulties in bipolar disorder part 1: Longitudinal
relationships with mental health. Journal of Mental Health (Abingdon, England), 27(6), 595–601.
doi:10.1080/09638237.2018.1521920 PMID:30445874
Sahadevan, S., Chin, J. J., Yap, M. N. M., & Yeoh, O. E. (2003). Assessing decision-making capacity
in dementia patients: A semi structured approach. Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore, 32,
749–755. PMID:14716942
Sakuraba, Y., Kumawzawa, Y., & Matsuda, O. (2004). Development of the Financial Competency Assessment
Tool (FCAT): A study of the reliability and validity of the FCAT. Bulettin of Tokyo Gakugei
University Section I Science Education, 55, 131–139.
Sherod, M. G., Griffith, H. R., Copeland, J., Belue, K., Krzywanski, S., Zamrini, E. Y., Harrell, L.,
Clark, D. G., Brockington, J. C., Powers, R., & Marson, D. C. (2009). Neurocognitive predictors of
financial capacity across the dementia spectrum: Normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s
disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 15(2), 258–267. doi:10.1017/
S1355617709090365 PMID:19203439
Shivapour, S. K., Nguyen, C. M., Cole, C. A., & Denburg, N. L. (2012). Effects of age, sex, and neuropsychological
performance on financial decision-making. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6, 1–9. doi:10.3389/
fnins.2012.00082 PMID:22715322
Slovenko, R. (2006). Civil competency. In I. B. Weiner & A. K. Hess (Eds.), The Handbook of Forensic
Psychology (pp. 190–209). John Wiley.
45
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Sousa, L. B., Simoes, M. R., Firmino, H., & Peisah, C. (2014). Financial and testamentary capacity
evaluations: Procedures and assessment instruments underneath a functional approach. International
Psychogeriatrics, 26(2), 217–228. doi:10.1017/S1041610213001828 PMID:24229806
Spreng, R. N., Cassidy, B. N., Darboh, B. S., DuPre, E., Lockrow, A. W., Setton, R., & Turner, G. R.
(2017). Financial exploitation is associated with structural and functional brain differences in healthy
older adults. Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biomedical Sciences and Medical Sciences, 72(10),
1365–1368. doi:10.1093/gerona/glx051 PMID:28369260
Stamovlasis, D., Giannouli, V., Vaiopoulou, J., & Tsolaki, M. (2022). Catastrophe theory applied to
neuropsychological data: Nonlinear effects of depression on financial capacity in amnestic Mild Cognitive
Impairment and Dementia. Entropy (Basel, Switzerland), 24(8), 1089. doi:10.3390/e24081089
PMID:36010753
Stoeckel, L. E., Stewart, C. C., Griffith, H. R., Triebel, K., Okonkwo, O. C., Den Hollander, J. A., Martin,
R. C., Belue, K., Copeland, J. N., Harrell, L. E., Brockington, J. C., Clark, D. G., & Marson, D. C. (2013).
MRI volume of the medial frontal cortex predicts financial capacity in patients with mild Alzheimer’s
disease. Brain Imaging and Behavior, 7(3), 282–292. doi:10.100711682-013-9226-3 PMID:23504597
Streisand, A. F., & Spar, J. E. (2008). A lawyer’s guide to diminishing capacity and effective use of
medical experts in contemporaneous and retrospective evaluations. ACTEC Journal, 33, 180–194.
Tolbert, S., Liu, Y., Hellegers, C., Petrella, J. R., Weiner, M. W., Wong, T. Z., & Murali Doraiswamy, P.
(2019). Financial management skills in aging, MCI and dementia: Cross sectional relationship to 18FFlorbetapir
PET cortical β-amyloid deposition. The Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease, 6(4),
274–282. doi:10.14283/jpad.2019.26 PMID:31686100
Tracy, V. L., Basso, M. R., Marson, D. C., Combs, D. R., & Whiteside, D. M. (2017). Capacity for financial
decision making in multiple sclerosis. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology,
39(1), 46–57. doi:10.1080/13803395.2016.1201050 PMID:27430343
Triebel, K. L., Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Marceaux, J., Okonkwo, O. C., Harrell, L., Clark, D., Brockington,
J., Bartolucci, A., & Marson, D. C. (2009). Declining financial capacity in mild cognitive impairment:
A 1-year longitudinal study. Neurology, 73(12), 928–934. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b87971
PMID:19770468
Triebel, K. L., Okonkwo, O. C., Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Crowther, M., & Marson, D. C. (2010). Financial
capacity of older African Americans with amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimer Disease
and Associated Disorders, 24(4), 365–371. doi:10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181e7cb05 PMID:20625268
Van Wielingen, L. E., Tuokko, H. A., Cramer, K., Mateer, C. A., & Hultsch, D. F. (2004). Awareness
of financial skills in dementia. Aging & Mental Health, 8(4), 374–380. doi:10.1080/13607860410001
709728 PMID:15370053
Wadley, V. G., Harrell, L. E., & Marson, D. C. (2003). Self- and informant report of financial abilities
in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: Reliable and valid? Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,
51(11), 1621–1626. doi:10.1046/j.1532-5415.2003.51514.x PMID:14687393
46
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
Weissberger, G. H., Samek, A., Mosqueda, L., Nguyen, A. L., Lim, A. C., Fenton, L., & Han, S. D.
(2022). Increased financial altruism is associated with Alzheimer’s Disease neurocognitive profile in older
adults. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 88(3), 995–1005. doi:10.3233/JAD-220187 PMID:35723104
Widera, E., Steenpass, V., Marson, D., & Sudore, R. (2011). Finances in the older patient with cognitive
impairment: “He didn’t want me to take over”. Journal of the American Medical Association, 305(7),
698–706. doi:10.1001/jama.2011.164 PMID:21325186
Wood, S. (2007). The role of neuropsychological assessment in capacity evaluations. In S. H. Qualls &
M. A. Smyer (Eds.), Changes in decision-making capacity in older adults: Assessment and intervention
(pp. 191–204). John Wiley.
Wood, S., Bally, K., Cabane, C., Fassbind, P., Jox, R. J., Leyhe, T., Monsch, A., & Trachsel, M. (2020).
Decision-making capacity evaluations: The role of neuropsychological assessment from a multidisciplinary
perspective. BMC Geriatrics, 20(1), 535. doi:10.118612877-020-01932-x PMID:33302888
World Health Organization. (2002). Active aging: A police framework. World Health Organization.
ADDITIONAL READING
Alzheimer Europe. (2016). Decision making and legal capacity in dementia. Country comparisons.
Alzheimer Europe.
American Bar Association Commission on Law and Aging and American Psychological Association.
(2008). Assessment of older adults with diminished capacity: A handbook for psychologists. American
Bar Association and American Psychological Association.
Bush, S. S., Demakis, G. J., & Rohling, M. L. (2017). APA handbook of forensic neuropsychology.
American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/0000032-000
Demakis, G. J. (Ed.). (2012). Civil capacities in clinical neuropsychology: Research findings and practical
applications. Oxford University Press.
Hategan, A., Bourgeois, J. A., Cheng, T., & Young, J. (2018). Geriatric psychiatry study guide. Springer
International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-77128-1
Larrabee, P. G. J. (Ed.). (2011). Forensic neuropsychology: A scientific approach. Oxford University Press.
Lichtenberg, P. A. (2008). Mental health practice in geriatric health care settings. Routldege.
Lichtenberg, P. A. (Ed.). (2010). Handbook of assessment in clinical gerontology. Academic Press.
McPherson, S., & Koltai, D. (2018). A practical guide to geriatric neuropsychology. Oxford University
Press. doi:10.53841/bpscpf.2018.1.312.48
47
Neuropsychological Assessment and Financial Capacity in Older Adults
﻿
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Financial Abuse: One of the most common, yet underreported, types of elder abuse, which can
take the form of having money/property stolen, being put under pressure in relation to money or other
property, being scammed, and having money or other property misused by family members, caregivers
and/or foreigners.
Financial Capacity/Competence: A medico–legal construct that represents an individual’s ability to
manage his/her own financial affairs based on the financial knowledge and financial skills that a person
possesses and in a manner that is independent and consistent with personal self-interest(s) as well as
with prior and current values.
Neuropsychological Assessment: A complex procedure that is carried out by trained psychologists
in order to assess the extent of impairment to a particular skill and to attempt to determine the area(s)
of possible brain damage, involving the integration of data from relevant tests, socio-demographic data,
medical records, neuroimaging results, and other relevant information.
Neurocognitive Disorders: Major and mild neurocognitive disorders were previously known as
dementia, but according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5), it is an umbrella term for a group of brain conditions that frequently lead to impaired mental
function.
Old Age: The last stage in the life processes of an individual, usually accompanied by cognitive,
emotional and behavioral changes.
48
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 4
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch004
ABSTRACT
The studies about the functioning of the elderly play an important role on what the present knowledge of
the demography in the world is. The conceptual aspects of functioning according to WHO and operated
by the international classification of functioning (ICF), have been insufficiently addressed concerning
its adequate applicability in most countries, hindering the contributions of its operation. The ICF operationalizes
a new paradigm of the concepts of functionality/disability, but also in relation to the concepts
of health/illness, quality of life and well-being; where social skills, personal skills and physical capacity
are emphasized, in a multidirectional and dynamic way, where all its components interact equitably
with each other. The authors reflect on the contributions that the ICF can make to the organizational,
legislative, and structural needs in terms of aging.
Reflections on Functioning
and Disability in Aging
and Public Health
Ana Paula Fontes
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4431-5229
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela de Magalhães Ribeiro
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2227-1851
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal & University Hospital Center of Algarve, Portugal
Luís Pedro Ribeiro
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6967-0534
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
49
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
1. INTRODUCTION
Population aging is one of the world’s major demographic and social issues today, with a particularly
important framework in the most industrialized and developed societies. Recent changes and prospective
population analyses have pointed to unprecedented opportunities and challenges for systems and
policies, which must reflect the possibility of individuals remaining autonomous for as long as possible.
This trend requires sustained planning for aging populations to ensure that risks are minimized and opportunities
are maximized.
Suppose the gains achieved in longevity were the result of the various interventions of Public Health.
In that case, it is also expected to be its responsibility the interventions for the challenges ahead regarding
the dynamics of aging, whose operationalization should focus on maintaining and promoting the
health of older individuals. Numerous documents from international organizations refer to the need to
follow this challenge for healthy aging, a process that respects all stages of the life cycle based on the
health, participation, and security of individuals, the result of which should be to promote longer and,
above all, healthier lives.
Moreover, if this is an interactive process whose changes intersect and are reflected in the lives of
individuals, societies, and countries, it will naturally be a process that requires modifications and adaptations
at the individual, social, and organizational levels. One of the platforms for exercising Public
Health in this context concerns reducing social inequalities in health. This aspect tends to increase with
age and, despite encompassing different socioeconomic, behavioral, psychosocial, and genetic factors,
the empowerment we provide to individuals in terms of health education may be decisive in minimizing
these inequalities.
Knowing these interactions through interdisciplinary research will also be a challenging task for
Public Health, whose development must respect the diversity and heterogeneity of older people, the aptitude
and accountability of local decision-makers, and a conceptually and dimensionally comprehensive
environment that promotes healthy aging.
Along with the demographic transition observed in recent decades resulting from low birth and
mortality levels and high longevity, an epidemiological transition has reflected the changing pattern of
diseases and causes of death resulting from societal changes that include urbanization, consumption,
and lifestyle habits.
Although mortality rates have remained high in developing countries, the global trend points towards
an increase in chronic and degenerative diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, oncological diseases,
dementias, and diabetes. In the epidemiological context of the elderly population, it is also pivotal to
consider the risk for infectious diseases resulting from the senescence of immune and homeostatic functions
or the greater interaction of chronic versus infectious comorbidities.
Thus, in the coming years, knowing the mechanisms and components that contribute to changes in
the functioning of the elderly population, whether in the absence or the presence of acute or acquired
disease, will be a challenge for all areas of knowledge.
For Public Health, this will not only be a determining obstacle for its intervention but also the acceptance
to consider the functioning of individuals and populations as an unavoidable variable in its
study. This consideration or evaluation is not intended to be complex or extensive, although it does
require the possibility of reproducing the limitations in the activities of individuals and quantifying the
need for equipment, services, and systems that promote the capacity and performance of these activities.
This goal has not been fully achieved, and some weaknesses have been observed in different countries
50
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
regarding functioning-related variables. Most health surveys or censuses are weak in terms of quantity
and the standardization of concepts, the latter being crucial for epidemiological comparison, especially
for the early detection of groups or populations at risk.
Nevertheless, adopting the biopsychosocial model operationalized by the International Classification
of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) has enabled one to observe positive progress in this difficult,
as attested to by the MHADIE (Measuring Health and Disability in Europe) (Leonardi et al, 2010a);
(Leonardi et al, 2010b)) and MURINET (Multidisciplinary Research Network on Health and Disability
in Europe) (Leonardi et al, 2012) multicentric projects, which concluded globally the need to coordinate
and integrate the concepts of functioning/disability at all levels of policy-making and in all sectors.
It is known that health and social science professionals are already aware of its multidimensionality
over 20 years after the dissemination of the model and the ICF. One can observe, however, that they
are still faced with difficulties in understanding the interactivity and integrative capacity that underlie
them. Hence, they are still far from accepting or understanding them in an absolute way as a conceptual
model, but above all, as an action model.
We still maintain a powerful rootedness concerning the dialectics of the biomedical model, both in
terms of academic resources and our professional practices. Admitting and acting equitably and dynamically
with all the dimensions we know today of functioning remains a strenuous exercise to manage
and put into practice. In rehabilitation, assessment and intervention processes are the paradigms of this
biological determinism by focusing almost exclusively or preferentially on changes in physiological
functions, with significant neglect of contextual, environmental, and personal factors.
These contextual factors, now conceptualized much more comprehensively, have a primary and
central role in the ICF. They go beyond their importance as determinants of health status and are now
considered not only as a change to the locus of disability, but above all, they are recognized as the locus
of intervention and, therefore, of functioning.
In this chapter, the authors reflect on the conceptual aspects of functioning/disability in the elderly
population and the importance of these concepts for developing public health.
2. BACKGROUND
a) Conceptual Aspects of Functioning and Disability
The concepts related to binomial functioning/disability frame an evolution that reflects transformations
in the health sciences and encompasses changes operating in the social field. The evolution of these
constructs has appeared naturally linked to the evolution of the health/illness binomial, which is also a
result of these mutations and their models, whose major movement took place between the biomedical
and social models.
The 1960s were fruitful in the process of change regarding the concept of disability; individual responsibility
for this condition was abandoned, social commitment and involvement were admitted, and
the first policies and legislation on the integration and inclusion of people with disabilities were created
and defined (Barnes & Mercer, 2003). From the standpoint of fundamental assertions, the biomedical
model explains disability or, broadly speaking, impairment or disease based on deviations from the norm
of measurable biological (somatic) variables, in which biological indices are the only criteria for its
definition, where the disease occurs dichotomously as a biological problem and health as the absence of
51
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
disease. The conceptual-affective autonomy of the patient is not considered, promoting in them a passive
and obedient role whose outcome derives from the epistemological authority of the physician/therapist.
The social model of disability, nevertheless, considers it a problem created by society and, basically,
an issue of full integration of the individual in society. In this sense, disability is not an individual attribute
but the result of a complex set of conditions, many created by the surrounding environment,
whose resolution requires social action and accountability, particularly with a view to environmental
modifications, which is necessary to fully integrate people with disabilities in all social areas.
In addition to the therapeutic dialectics of disability and impairment, the biomedical and social models
involve differences in other domains, such as policies, intervention models, or the cultural environment,
as explained in Table 1.
Based on the combination of the two previous models, but without using them up, the biopsychosocial
approach to functioning/disability emerged with Engel in 1977. This author pointed out the relativization
of the biomedical and social models in this framework, pointing out the accountability and dynamic interconnection
of the biological, psychological, and social dimensions in interpreting human functioning.
According to the biopsychosocial model, the theoretical and methodological goal of medicine
should consist of the interconnection of the person’s biological, psychological, and social dimensions,
where each dimension alone cannot account for health or disease. It is precisely on this assumption that
the biomedical model is criticized since treatments based exclusively on it are insufficient. “Rational
treatment (...) directed only at the biochemical abnormality does not necessarily restore the patient’s
health, even when we envisage correction or relief of the abnormality (...) The biochemical deficiency
may determine certain characteristics of the disease, but not necessarily the point at which the person
becomes ill or accepts the role or status of patient” (Engel, 1977).
Table 1. Conceptual paradigms of disability in the biomedical models and social
Biomedical model Social model
Problem Disability/Dependency of People Mismatch of Contexts with People
Origen People Society
Focus In the Person. In their Limitations Person/Context Relationship; on Social Barriers
Ethics Assistance Rights/Equal Opportunities
Goals Rehabilitate, Cure, Treat Enable; Remove Barriers; Promote
Compatibility
Perspective Special Needs; Special Services Different Needs; Regular Services
Services Institutionalized; Network of Care Supportive; Community-Based
Power, Control Professionals Customers
Culture “Disabling; Maintenance and Reinforcement of Disability Recognition and Inclusion of Diversity
Policy Objectives Compensating Individuals for their Disabilities; “Relieving
the Situation”
Promote Rights; Provide Resources and Skills
to Identify and Eliminate Personal and Social
Barriers
Policy Focus In Individuals; in People with Disabilities In the Social Group; in the Global Population
Responsibility Social Policy; Welfare Provision Transversal Policies
52
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Although the literature refers to other theories (Masala & Petretto, 2008), the operationalization of
functioning/disability has been discussed and been based mainly on three conceptual schemes: that of the
sociologist Saad Nagi and the WHO models, in its first version through the International Classification
of Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps (ICIDH) and in its most recent version through the ICF.
These three models are schematized in Figure 1.
Saad Nagi’ model of disability is considered the pioneer in describing the disability process. This
author proposed a process divided into four stages with unidirectional and sequential linearity. Pathology
interrupts the normal process of physical and mental functioning, leading to an impairment of functions
and structures, which necessarily leads to a limitation in the individual’s usual activities, finally precipitating
an inability to perform expected or expected social roles (Nagi, 1976). In this model, disability
is based on a strong social construction, especially the inability to perform social roles and activities
related to work and family, even when this author also identifies a disability at the individual level. The
major criticisms of this model are related to a sequential causality that often does not exist and the absence
of the interaction of individual and environmental factors. The ICIDH (WHO, 1980) was created
Figure 1. The conceptual schemes of functioning/Disability according to NAGI and the WHO
53
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
to support the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), which conceptualized a classification of
the consequences of the disease, still very much rooted in the biomedical model.
The contemporaneity of cultural changes and the emancipation of movements for equality and opportunity
for people with disabilities precipitated early recognition of its weaknesses, which resulted in
successive revisions. It has been criticized for its lack of relationship between the different dimensions,
unidimensional nature, the predominance of a negative terminology very focused on disability, the reference
to the biomedical, sequential, and causal model, disability being seen as an individual and direct
result of disability, and the almost non-existent approach to social and contextual aspects.
Before the transformations that the ICF went through until it reached its final version in 2001, we
highlight the importance of two authors, Verbrugge and Jette, who developed a model that associated
the two previously described, also emphasizing the importance of intra-individual and extra-individual
factors in the process of disability development for the first time (Verbrugge & Jette, 1994). Although
it is not a very interactive and multidirectional model, the authors already mentioned the possibility of
rupture in the sequence of the different dimensions. In other words, they highlighted the possibility that
disability may arise without a disability or that disability may not necessarily lead to disability.
After various studies and drafts, the ICIDH gave way to the ICF, which was approved at the 54th
World Health Assembly on May 22, 2001 (WHO, 2001). The ICF operationalizes a new paradigm of
functioning/disability, health/disease, quality of life, and well-being, where social skills, personal abilities,
and physical capacity are emphasized in a multidirectional and dynamic way where all its components
interact equally with each other. Hence, functioning and disability operate on a continuum and interactively
in relation to personal health status, individual resources, and the environment, establishing a new
framework of philosophical principles, as presented in Table 2.
Although assessing disabilities is not negligible, the ICF emphasizes the importance of assessing the
difficulties at the level of Activities/Participation that individuals experience due to the interaction of
their physiological potential and the social environment where they move. Hence, the importance that
environmental factors acquire in determining the functioning/disability of individuals and populations
is that the objectives of the interventions are created in a balanced relationship between the individual
potential and the physical, social, and attitudinal facilitation of the environment.
Maintaining functioning during the aging process refers us to other multidimensional and interactive
constructs, including successful, healthy, or active aging. Although some of them maintain some
Table 2. ICF principles
Functionality NO Disability Only
Universal Model NO Minority Only
Biopsychosocial Approach NO Only the Biomedical or Social Model
Interactive Model NO Linear or Progressive
Inclusive Context NO Individual Alone
Cultural Assessment NO Western Concepts Only
Operational NO Theoretical Only
Life Cycle NO Adults Only
54
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
conceptual difficulties, others are better defined, and it is not our intention to make a conceptual analysis
of their similarities or differences, which has already been well discussed by other authors (Bowling &
Dieppe, 2005; Crimmins, 2004). What matters to us is to establish a guideline that can embrace a common
aspect to all: how to identify, maintain, and enhance the functioning of individuals linked to their
chronological longevity in the last stages of the life cycle, the one we know, and the one we foresee in
the near future.
In this sense, functioning or, for some authors, human functioning (Stucki et al., 2008), should be
fundamentally measured by mobility and activities of daily living because these are the most important
aspects for individuals considering the positive or negative interference that contextual factors have on
these components. Despite this assumption, the continuous systematization of the process of functioning
assessment in the elderly has not yet been given the importance it deserves by the medical and social
care professionals, nor is it assiduously included in the patient’s clinical history.
Nevertheless, this type of baseline assessment is an adequate and useful way to operationalize the
care provided to the elderly; it detects disabilities, creates opportunities for enhancing the remaining
abilities, allows for identifying individual needs, defining therapeutic goals, planning and implementing
interventions, and assessing their effect (Thonnard & Penta, 2007). In addition, the totality of these outcomes
facilitates and promotes the prevention and control of risks that persist in geriatric units (Zelada
et al., 2009).
Mobility is the ability to move one’s body through space, including walking, standing up, changing
position, or climbing stairs (Studenski, 2003a). These tasks inherent to mobility are actions necessary
for constructing both the basic activities of daily living (BADL) or self-care (e.g., bathing, dressing, and
eating) and the instrumental activities of daily living (IADL), also known as extended activities (e.g.,
household chores, preparing meals, shopping, and managing money).
Walking is the primary task of human mobility and functioning, and is at the same time complex concerning
the associated neuro-motor functions and dependent on many variables, such as musculoskeletal
functions (Buchman et al., 2010; Ostchegaat al, 2004; Sakari et al., 2010), sensory functions (Deshpande
& Patla, 2007), neuro-motor control (Gerin-Lajoie et al., 2006), and cognitive status (Watson et al., 2010).
There is empirical evidence that objective measurement or self-report of walking ability in the elderly is
a powerful predictor of performance for activities of daily living (Abellan van Kan et al., 2009; Studenski
et al., 2003b), falls (Wrisley & Kumar, 2010), hospitalization (Studenski et al., 2003b), and mortality
(Hardy et al., 2007; Studenski et al., 2011). If we are in the presence of populations with satisfactory or
high levels of independence, gait speed should be replaced or accompanied by more demanding tests
such as stair climbing/descending (Weiss et al., 2007).
The ability to walk can be measured in various ways. The most common, practical, and objective,
especially in the elderly population, is the one that measures the time to walk 4 or 8 meters using a stopwatch
or a pedometer (Abellan van Kan et al., 2009; Viccaro et al., 2011); the normal walking speed in
healthy adults varies between 1.2 and 1.4 m/s, decreasing from 50/60 years of age (Bohannon, 1997).
All these studies support the premise that gait speed is a fundamental indicator of the state of the
underlying physiological systems and an important predictor of some measures or markers of health; it
has also been dubbed the sixth vital sign by some researchers (Fritz & Lusardi, 2009). In this regard, it
is essential to standardize assessment measures and establish cut points for both clinical and research to
identify these associations (Graham et al., 2008). Some studies have been able to advance values that can
serve as a reference for interventions. For instance, for Cesari et al. (2005), a speed <1 m/s can identify
55
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
a high risk for health and functioning in the elderly, or a speed <0.6 m/s can identify an inability for
BADLs and an increased risk for hospitalization (Studenski et al., 2003b).
In a review of 9 cohort studies, Studenski et al. (2011) concluded that improvements of >0.1 m/s
could significantly increase the survival rate of the individuals. Along with mobility, activities related to
self-care should also be assessed in the elderly population, given that their results have a critical predictive
value both for institutionalization and mortality (Gill et al., 1998; Hjaltadottir et al., 2011; Keeler
et al., 2010). Additionally, they are the most important for the individual, representing the possibility of
living autonomously or independently.
Some studies, both cross-sectional and longitudinal, have analyzed hierarchically the disability or the
progressive decline of tasks related to self-care and instrumental activities, organizing an evolutionary
pattern of disability of these activities (Jagger et al., 2001; Kempen et al., 1995; Kingston et al., 2012;
Weiss et al., 2007), although the associations with age and sex, or even with environmental factors, are
important aspects of differentiation.
Most studies have also reported that instrumental activities precede those related to self-care in
difficulty (Jagger et al., 2001; Kempen et al., 1995; Kingston et al., 2012; Weiss et al., 2007); nonetheless,
this dichotomy may be too reductionist or simplistic. A study by Ferrucci et al. (1998) involving
seven sample groups from five European countries was perhaps the first to use another organization.
The progression of disability was made by domains (containing different but equally demanding tasks)
considering the functions associated with them: dexterity, balance, and limb strength. Considering this
possibility, we find different conclusions regarding this hierarchy depending on the implied physiological
function. If we are identifying dexterity (for example, nail clipping), disability will occur first in the
upper limbs (Ferrucci et al., 1998; Kingston et al., 2012), although if we consider strength function, it
will decline initially in the lower limbs (Jagger et al., 2001).
These aspects, together with others, such as the limited inclusion of questions (usually no more than
5 or 6), which may lead to a floor effect, the non-differentiation of activities for men and women, which
may be relevant in terms of IADLs (the difference between “not doing” and having the “inability to
do”) and the lack of inclusion of older adults (≥85 years), lead to the conclusion that we maintain some
inhibitions about the knowledge of the evolution of disability at the activity level (Kingston et al., 2012).
In addition to all of these aspects, as pointed out in numerous studies, it is essential to emphasize
the importance or the effect that cognitive functions and contextual factors can have on this type of assessment.
However, individuals have motor potential, cognitive impairments can inhibit the ability and
performance of activities, and environmental factors can manifest themselves as barriers, hindering this
ability and performance in the same way.
Among the daily activities commonly tested, bathing is recurrently referred to as the one that produces
the most significant limitation in the elderly population, which usually precedes other basic difficulties
and is also one of the tasks as an important causes of fractures (Gill et al., 2006; Naik et al., 2004;
Bleijlevens et al., 2010). In this sense, it is critical to shed more light on specific aspects of this activity,
which may help caregivers in their intervention strategies. For instance, to know which sub-tasks are
assigned to them, which are more difficult to perform, which are the major difficulties that the elderly
indicate for their performance, and which and how environmental factors may be associated with them.
As for the sub-tasks, leaving the bathing position is referred to as the most difficult task to perform
(Naik et al., 2004); this action associates the integrity of several systems with an important neuro-motor
control in a short temporal and spatial space. First-person accounts mention that the most frequent and
impeding causes for the independent performance of this task are balance deficit, arthritic complaints,
56
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
and the fear of falling (Naik et al., 2004). As for environmental factors, namely assistive devices and
physical alterations to the bathroom, they are still rarely used and can be a valuable aid to the ability to
perform the bath (Naik & Gill, 2005). Nonetheless, for Gill et al. (2007), these supports do not always
benefit individuals; they may be an aid but may also anticipate further limitations. For these authors,
non-slip mats improve bathing performance, although bath seats/chairs and grab bars may precipitate
disability by decreasing sensory and motor stimulation (Gill et al., 2007).
This conclusion deserves important reflection and differentiation about the safety of the individuals
and their remaining capacities; while sensory motor stimulation is at the basis of all rehabilitative interventions,
any situation should be guided by the safety of the individual. Finding the balance between
this union allows one to better understand the differentiation between the results and the professionals.
After bathing, the activity “dressing” appears in research as the activity that produces the most significant
limitation, even in the presence of groups without defined disabilities (Walker et al., 2012); this
activity demands dexterity, visuospatial coordinates, and apraxia (Sunderland et al., 2006). The act of
dressing, regardless of the manual skills required, involves recognizing parts and an ordered selection and
sequence, making it a complex task (Feyereisen et al., 1999). Another study also states that the persistent
limitations found in the different subtasks of this activity are determined by the specificity of cognitive
impairment (Walker et al., 2004). Regarding instrumental activities usually organized by the Lawton and
Brody index (1969), they require a more elaborate ability not only of the functions associated with them
(limb strength, mobility, balance, coordination, sensory functions, and cognition) but also an adequate
interaction with an external environment, with multiple requests and demands, and not always familiar.
From a physiological point of view, their demands can be divided into two major groups; some require
primarily cognitive activity (using the phone, money management, or medication management), while
others add an important dose of neuromusculoskeletal functions (shopping, cooking, and household
activities). As already mentioned, a common determinant component related to the restriction of participation
in more elaborate activities is related to mobility as a basic component of the interaction of
the individual with the environment. This association is closer when activities are directed to the outside
or the community (Desrosiers et al., 2009; Fairhall et al., 2011).
Some researchers have also mentioned that in cognitive terms, the performance of instrumental activities
depends on global cognitive activity, mainly visuospatial perception and executive cognitive skills
(Glosser et al., 2002; Jefferson et al., 2006a; Bell-McGinty et al., 2002; Boyle et al., 2004; Jefferson et
al., 2006b). Although the concept or definition of executive skills or functions is not perfectly unanimous
in the literature, most authors refer to them as a set of functions that includes working memory,
planning, initiation, and execution of intentional behaviors, where inhibition, mental flexibility, and
problem-solving are included among others (Jefferson et al., 2006c; Johnson et al., 2007).
All of these functions tend to decline at older ages (Mitchell & Miller, 2008; Borson, 2010), and
even when this decline is slight, it can influence ability in daily tasks, especially those related to more
elaborate activities (Johnson et al., 2007). However, the dependence between cognitive function versus
ability/performance in activity is not always linear. Although conclusive studies on this relationship are
scarce, using the telephone, using transportation, and managing medication and money seem to be those
tasks where a greater association is found (Barberger-Gateau et al., 1992; Bell-McGinty et al., 2002).
Nonetheless, we found studies showing that the tasks most involved with cognition require mandatory
sequencing; in this case, preparing meals, doing laundry, or managing money may be more impaired
(Jefferson et al., 2006c).
57
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Finally, the question here is how executive functions can be measured to have a concrete understanding
of their influence on activity performance and independent living. Most studies report that these
functions have a higher predictive value for activity performance when compared to global cognitive
assessment tests such as the Mini-Mental Test Examination (Bell-McGinty et al., 2002; Jefferson et al.,
2006c; Johnson et al., 2007; Royall et al., 2004).
There is no consensus in the literature regarding the form (self-report, caregiver interview, or direct
measurement) and the tests to measure the various functions involved in the different components of
these activities, nor which one or more have a more substantial value. Those that exist are very different
concerning the samples’ age, education, cognitive status, or comorbidities, making evidence on this
subject difficult. Is important that integrate knowledge about the ability and performance of activities of
daily living with that about cognitive functioning, which can be valued and harnessed for epidemiology,
especially for more effective intervention strategies. This new understanding may precipitate the need
to revise some tests that better capture and fit the variations or outcomes of Activities/Participation.
Despite the difficulties, the Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and Vital Elderly (ACTIVE)
study, one of the largest multicenter controlled longitudinal studies to evaluate cognitive training in the
elderly, provided some important findings for future studies (Gross et al., 2011). Inductive reasoning
appears to be the best predictor of the functioning of daily activities at the initial assessment, with that
place taken by memory at the final assessment. At the same time, action processing speed proved to be
the poorest predictor at both assessment times (Gross et al., 2011).
Another important aspect when analyzing the performance of more elaborate activities is related
not only to the different functions or components of cognition, as already mentioned, but also to the
association or determination that contextual, personal, and/or environmental factors may have in this
process (Burton et al., 2006). For example, Wilkie et al. (2007) reported that personal factors (health
status, economic status, and occupation) were associated with the performance of most outdoor-related
instrumental activities. While there may be a relationship between self-care and instrumental activities,
they depend on a much broader set of those factors.
After reviewing the literature on basic and instrumental activities, we will now clarify how this
dichotomy is combined in the current conceptual framework of functioning. As we mentioned, they
are distinguished by the complexity and variability of the functions that interact with them and by the
absence or presence of an external or social environment. In the ICF, this dichotomy does not exist; we
can find in the same domain basic and instrumental activities; for instance, “using transportation” appears
in the Mobility domain, together with the basic activity “getting up/sitting down.” Additionally, the
activity “managing medication” appears alongside “bathing” and “dressing” in the Self-Care domain.
In other words, in terms of classification, activities are a single component that can be differentiated
according to whether they are performed in a standard or uniform environment — activity — or in a
real-life environment — participation — which, in turn, are linked in terms of the constructs of capacity
and performance, respectively.
This division, not always perceptible and conciliatory in academic and clinical environments, has
caused some controversy (Guralnik & Ferrucci, 2009). Nevertheless, above all, it commits us to a new
paradigm on basic versus instrumental activities, specifically in the universe of assessing ability and
performance. This separation resides or is established by the environment where it occurs or happens.
Although we know some results about this division (Jette et al., 2003), the operationalization of its definitions
is unclear, as we will demonstrate herein. Any activity can be performed either in the usual or
real environment (the home, other dwellings, neighborhood, and the city), where the individual moves
58
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
(performance), or in another social environment, which is real, is not the usual (performance) or even
in a standard or uniform environment (ICF nomenclature), which being real is not the usual (ability)
(WHO, 2001). Therefore, while the environment can differentiate these constructs, it cannot distinguish
them entirely; the WHO points out that performance always corresponds to the interaction with real
environmental factors, in the capacity these factors also exist. The difference is that it is assumed that
they are “standardized,” with a “neutral” action on the individual (WHO, 2001).
According to the WHO, capacity reveals the aptitude or the maximum level of functioning that an
individual can achieve in an adjusted environment, or even that the difference between capacity and
performance reflects the difference between the real and uniform environment or also the impact that
the real environment (physical, social, and attitudinal) has on the person’s performance (WHO, 2001).
By circumventing these methodological and conceptual difficulties, we are interested in contributing to
their operationalization in the context of rehabilitation teams, with regard to assessment and intervention,
but mainly in the objectives and outcomes for individuals.
Following what we have previously reflected as a new paradigm in the evaluation system — decentralizing
the process from functions and converging it to activities — it seems to us that the next step
for intervention is to know how this step of the process is articulated with the final goal: acquisition or
maximization of the person’s participation, participation being the maximum level of autonomy and
independence that we hold in a “habitual or real-life involvement or experience” (WHO, 2001).
Our therapeutic interventions take place in uniform or standard environments, which may or may
not approximate the actual environments of the individuals. In this sense, if we stick to those environments,
what we achieve is in the realm of ability, which may fall short of the needs for performance and
participation. Approximating and simulating therapeutic environments to the reality of the spaces and
surroundings where people move will increase the possibility of therapeutic results being more adjusted
to the real needs of individuals.
b) Disability and Morbidity in a Framework of Increased life Expectancy
The conceptual and methodological difficulties we have pointed out have caused impediments to the
knowledge and comparison of data on the functioning/disability of populations, specifically the elderly
population, not only in contemporary terms but also concerning its trend or predictability. Bypassing
this obstacle and looking at some available results, disability decreased in the last decades (Lee et al.,
2020; Rector et al., 2020; Fuller-Thomson et al., 2023).
These results, which occurred essentially in the last two decades of the last century, were the consequence
of two major groups of factors: i) improvement in medical and pharmacological procedures,
especially in rheumatic diseases, cardiovascular diseases, cataracts, and hip and knee replacements and
ii) improvement in education and living standards of the populations (Brown et al., 2012; Schoeni et
al., 2008), resulting in less disabling diseases and/or whose progression is stopped before the onset of
disability (Crimmins & Beltrán-Sánchez, 2011).
When analyzing the data on the evolution of disability for different activities, as in the study by
Freedman et al. (2008), the authors concluded that there is an improvement in those related to self-care,
although there was stability in the results observed in those related to instrumental activities. Hung
et al. (2011), whose cohort was studied in 1998, 2004, and 2008, observed some improvements, and
despite being insignificant, the results are expected to remain stable. In this study, the analysis by age
59
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
stratification revealed improved activities in the older age group, and these results corroborate Schoeni
et al. (2008) and Fuller-Thomson et al. (2023)
The addition of dependent variables to the logistic regression model in the study by Martin et al.
(2010) allowed us to conclude that smoking, obesity, and education are explanatory markers of the
results obtained, which are globally consistent with those previously mentioned. For the authors, education,
specifically adopting healthier lifestyles, access to health care, health literacy, use of assistive
devices, and reduction or even the cessation of smoking and obesity control, may be the bridges to the
explanation and trend of disability in older populations in the coming years. The literature review by
Christensen et al. (2009) discussed disability trends between 1985–2002 for older people aged 85 years
and under and concluded that there is a trend toward decreasing disability in the younger age group in
most countries. This review also raised two hypotheses for the coming years based on two trends: “the
failure of success” and “the success of success.” Regarding the first, the authors predicted that the cohort
of individuals who live to be 100 years old will show an increase in disability at that age alone. In
other words, we will see a tendency for the onset of disease and disability to manifest late, concentrated
at very advanced ages, individualizing a fourth age, which is believed to be characterized by high rates
of disability and dependence. For the second hypothesis, the authors advocate that exceptionally longlived
“super-survivors” will enjoy the “success of success,” reaching these ages without an increase in
disability. The study concluded, however, that we still have no data to make predictions about disability
for ages >85.
This issue of morbidity compression at older ages is advocated by Fries et al. (2011) as a necessary
attribute of healthy aging. It should be accepted as a construct that allows assessing health gains and
losses throughout the life cycle. The work of these authors, which includes a broad analysis of studies
in terms of methodological variability, concludes that if we have been able to improve this indicator in
the last thirty years without well-defined strategies, we should now be able to improve and understand
it better if we plan our interventions in a more systematized way.
The issue of morbidity compression is far from being unanimously accepted because, given it is
a highly dynamic process, there are many variables to be taken into account and many that we have
yet to master or understand; the age of onset of disability (which includes all its components) and the
probability of recovery of functions and activities are essential parts of the process of change in health
status and may precede mortality. The work of Crimmins and Beltrán-Sánchez (2011), while not being
so optimistic about some of the factors included in the compression of morbidity, agrees concerning
aspects related to functioning and disability, warning, however, that the results observed are due to the
decrease in prevalence, but that the incidence values do not have similar representation.
On the other hand, in Lee et al (2020) multicenter study, it was concluded that significant gains in
life expectancy have translated into different gains in healthy years of life across different countries; for
countries such as Belgium, Czechia, and Mexico, it is noted an increase of disability prevalence, whereas
in countries such as Denmark, England, Greece, Korea, Poland, and Sweden, it is observed a substantial
decrease in disability prevalence. In this way, the authors conclude that diverse time trends in disability
prevalence across countries reaffirm that the expansion of late-life disability is not inevitable.
Also the paper of Crimmins et al (2020) presents empirical work incorporating the social hallmarks
of aging with indicators of multiple biological hallmarks of aging as well as downstream biology in explaining
a range of health outcomes. Results show the relative strength of the associations of social and
biological measures with important health outcomes. Social factors are strongly related to physical and
cognitive functioning and multimorbidity in this older population; this remains true when the significant
60
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
number of biological measures are controlled. These results can be interpreted to mean that a significant
amount of the social variance in age-related health outcomes is not explained by these measures of biology.
Attention to the social hallmarks related to human aging can usefully be incorporated into work on the
biological hallmarks of aging to make greater progress in understanding functioning and human aging.
c) Functioning and Aging in the Context of Public Health
The demographic changes observed in recent years and projected for the near future, associated with
the epistemological evolution of functioning/disability, have projected new paradigms of action and
mediation in Public Health, which respond systematically to the current organizational, legislative, and
structural needs. Furthermore, because living more years is associated with a higher probability of losing
functioning, this success has produced a new phenomenon in all scientific domains: a large segment of
the population lives with disability and it is the universe of Public Health to know how to consider and
account for this phenomenon (Lollar & Crews, 2003).
The technological advances in health sciences have increased life expectancy by 30 years in some
countries in the last century (CDCP, 2011), so the Public Health performance of the last century, embodied
by the definition of being the science and art of disease prevention and health promotion, now
has a broader frame of reference and action. Riegelman and Kirkwood (2014) advocated for a broader
definition for the 21st century that includes a broad spectrum of the population perspective: the totality
of all evidence-based public and private efforts that preserve and promote health and prevent disease,
disability, and death. This definition expands the traditional scope of Public Health by including a broad
assessment of environmental, social, and economic determinants, including an assessment of healthrelated
interventions, the structure, and functioning of systems of care, the equity of their distribution,
and also the role of public policy (Riegelman & Kirkwood, 2014).
Evaluation is one of the imperative functions of Public Health; it is described as a process of systematic
and routine monitoring of the health of populations, where people with temporary or permanent
disability (s) are now an important fraction of this set, especially in older age groups. For Lollar and
Crews (2003), three procedures must be adopted to achieve this goal: the acceptance and development
of disability as an inescapable variable in monitoring the health of populations, the identification, and
differentiation of subgroups or typologies that disability may reveal, and finally, the assessment and
monitoring of personal and environmental factors as decision-makers in the process. Along with the
demographic variables that usually describe the populations, it is crucial to identify their level of disability
through simple but robust questions supported by the ICF conceptual framework and as described
by the evidence (Lollar & Crews, 2003).
This core of questions need not be lengthy but should be an integral part of any national health census
or survey, the results of which can mainly reproduce the limitations in activities and the need for equipment,
services, and systems that promote the capacity and performance of those activities. Overall, the
results can quantify the need for services and supports, study the life course of people with specific disabilities,
and precisely target prevention strategies (McDermott & Turk, 2011). National health surveys
have progressively included questions on activity-related disability/participation, although not always
collected in a similar and transversal way and not always organized by the domains of functioning that
we now know to be important in determining the functioning/disability profiles of the populations.
Hence, it has been difficult to accurately assess the characterization and progression of these domains,
making it difficult to plan and systematize interventions.
61
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Assuming disability as a determining variable in the study of Public Health, the next step concerns
the possibility of it characterizing the different levels of disability and consequently differentiating the
needs of individuals and populations. Calling upon the different domains of ICF activities/participation
for this identification and their qualifiers seems to be the way forward.
Knowing the individual competencies and the environment where people move will be determinant to
the involution or evolution of their disability, not only as interactive factors of this process, but mainly as
determinants of the locus of action, intervention, and resolution. The predictability of increased longevity
seems to be a given; regardless of the uncertainty about its consequences in terms of morbidity and
disability — compression, expansion, or dynamic balance — Public Health will always have a key role
in this monitoring, guided by the preventing diseases and disability at its different levels of intervention
(Fries et al., 2011).
In this way, the future research in public health might include (WHO, 2015): i) establishing regular
population surveys of older people that can reflect in detail the functional ability; intrinsic capacity; specific
health states; need for health care or long-term care or broader environmental changes, and whether
these needs are being met; ii) mapping trends in intrinsic capacity and functional ability in different birth
cohorts and determining whether increasing life expectancy is associated with added years of health;
identifying indicators and mechanisms for the continuous surveillance of healthy ageing trajectories.
CONCLUSION
The conceptual standardization of functioning/disability in the elderly population is crucial to organizing
strategies that promote greater autonomy and independence for this group. The WHO has made a
significant contribution to this development by creating the ICF and by continuously promoting its updating,
namely with the introduction of relevant, more identifiable, and explicit categories of functioning/
disability throughout the entire life cycle of individuals. Public Health must adopt the ICF conceptual
model in developing policies and actions aimed at the elderly population, given that there are no other
instruments capable of capturing consistent and reliable data on functioning and disability in such a
structured way.
Comprehensive public-health action on ageing is urgently needed. The societal response to population
ageing will require a transformation of health systems that moves away from disease-based curative
models and towards the provision of older-person-centered and integrated care. It must be built on
a fundamental shift in our understanding of ageing to one that takes account of the diversity of older
populations and responds to the inequities that often underlie ageing. And it will need to draw on better
ways of measuring and monitoring the health and functioning of older populations.
REFERENCES
Abellan van Kan, G., Rolland, Y., Andrieu, S., Bauer, J., Beauchet, O., Bonnefoy, M., Cesari, M., Donini,
L. M., Gillette Guyonnet, S., Inzitari, M., Nourhashemi, F., Onder, G., Ritz, P., Salva, A., Visser, M., &
Vellas, B. (2009). Gait speed at usual pace as a predictor of adverse outcomes in community-dwelling
older people an International Academy on Nutrition and Aging (IANA) Task Force. The Journal of
Nutrition, Health & Aging, 13(10), 881–889. doi:10.100712603-009-0246-z PMID:19924348
62
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Barberger-Gateau, P., Commenges, D., Gagnon, M., Letenneur, L., Sauvel, C., & Dartigues, J. F.
(1992). Instrumental activities of daily living as a screening tool for cognitive impairment and dementia
in elderly community dwellers. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 40(11), 1129–1134.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.1992.tb01802.x PMID:1401698
Barnes, C., & Mercer, G. (2003). Disability. Polity Press.
Bell-McGinty, S., Podell, K., Franzen, M., Baird, A. D., & Williams, M. J. (2002). Standard measures
of executive function in predicting instrumental activities of daily living in older adults. International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17(9), 828–834. doi:10.1002/gps.646 PMID:12221656
Bleijlevens, M. H., Diederiks, J. P., Hendriks, M. R., van Haastregt, J. C., Crebolder, H. F., & van Eijk,
J. T. (2010). Relationship between location and activity in injurious falls: An exploratory study. BMC
Geriatrics, 10(1), 40. doi:10.1186/1471-2318-10-40 PMID:20565871
Bohannon, R. W. (1997). Comfortable and maximum walking speed of adults aged 20-79 years: Reference
values and determinants. Age and Ageing, 26(1), 15–19. doi:10.1093/ageing/26.1.15 PMID:9143432
Borson, S. (2010). Cognition, aging, and disabilities: Conceptual issues. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
Clinics of North America, 21(2), 375–382. doi:10.1016/j.pmr.2010.01.001 PMID:20494283
Bowling, A., & Dieppe, P. (2005). What is successful ageing and who should define it? BMJ (Clinical
Research Ed.), 331(7531), 1548–1551. doi:10.1136/bmj.331.7531.1548 PMID:16373748
Boyle, P. A., Paul, R. H., Moser, D. J., & Cohen, R. A. (2004). Executive impairments predict
functional declines in vascular dementia. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 18(1), 75–82.
doi:10.1080/13854040490507172 PMID:15595360
Brown, D. C., Hayward, M. D., Montez, J. K., Hummer, R. A., Chiu, C. T., & Hidajat, M. M. (2012). The
significance of education for mortality compression in the United States. Demography, 49(3), 819–840.
doi:10.100713524-012-0104-1 PMID:22556045
Buchman, A. S., Shah, R. C., Leurgans, S. E., Boyle, P. A., Wilson, R. S., & Bennett, D. A. (2010).
Musculoskeletal pain and incident disability in community-dwelling older adults. Arthritis Care and
Research, 62(9), 1287–1293. doi:10.1002/acr.20200 PMID:20853470
Burton, C. L., Strauss, E., Hultsch, D. F., & Hunter, M. A. (2006). Cognitive functioning and everyday problem
solving in older adults. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 20(3), 432–452. doi:10.1080/13854040590967063
PMID:16895857
CDCP - Centers for Disease Control and prevention. (2011). Ten Great Public Health Achievements-
United States, 2001-2010. JAMA, 306(1), 36-38
Cesari, M., Kritchevsky, S. B., Penninx, B. W., Nicklas, B. J., Simonsick, E. M., Newman, A. B., Tylavsky,
F. A., Brach, J. S., Satterfield, S., Bauer, D. C., Visser, M., Rubin, S. M., Harris, T. B., & Pahor, M.
(2005). Prognostic value of usual gait speed in well-functioning older people—Results from the Health,
Aging and Body Composition Study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(10), 1675–1680.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53501.x PMID:16181165
63
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R., & Vaupel, J. W. (2009). Ageing populations: The challenges
ahead. Lancet, 374(9696), 1196–1208. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61460-4 PMID:19801098
Crimmins, E. M. (2004). Trends in the health of the elderly. Annual Review of Public Health, 25(1),
79–98. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124401 PMID:15015913
Crimmins, E. M. (2020). Social hallmarks of aging: Suggestions for geroscience research. Ageing Research
Reviews, 63, 101136. doi:10.1016/j.arr.2020.101136 PMID:32798771
Crimmins, E. M., & Beltrán-Sánchez, H. (2011). Mortality and morbidity trends: Is there compression
of morbidity? The Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66(1),
75–86. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbq088 PMID:21135070
Deshpande, N., & Patla, A. E. (2007). Visual-vestibular interaction during goal directed locomotion:
Effects of aging and blurring vision. Experimental Brain Research, 176(1), 43–53. doi:10.100700221-
006-0593-5 PMID:16847610
Desrosiers, J., Robichaud, L., Demers, L., Gélinas, I., Noreau, L., & Durand, D. (2009). Comparison and
correlates of participation in older adults without disabilities. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics,
49(3), 397–403. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2008.12.006 PMID:19136161
Engel, G. L. (1977). The need for a new medical model: A challenge for biomedicine. Science, 196(4286),
129–136. doi:10.1126cience.847460 PMID:847460
Fairhall, N., Sherrington, C., Kurrle, S. E., Lord, S. R., & Cameron, I. D. (2011). ICF participation restriction
is common in frail, community-dwelling older people: An observational cross-sectional study.
Physiotherapy, 97(1), 26–32. doi:10.1016/j.physio.2010.06.008 PMID:21295235
Ferrucci, L., Guralnik, J. M., Cecchi, F., Marchionni, N., Salani, B., Kasper, J., Celli, R., Giardini, S.,
Heikkinen, E., Jylhä, M., & Baroni, A. (1998). Constant hierarchic patterns of physical functioning across
seven populations in five countries. The Gerontologist, 38(3), 286–294. doi:10.1093/geront/38.3.286
PMID:9640848
Feyereisen, P., Gendron, M., & Seron, X. (1999). Disorders of everyday actions in subjects suffering
from senile dementia of Alzheimer’s type: An analysis of dressing performance. Neuropsychological
Rehabilitation, 9(2), 169–188. doi:10.1080/713755598
Freedman, V. A., Martin, L. G., Schoeni, R. F., & Cornman, J. C. (2008). Declines in late-life disability:
the role of early- and mid-life factors. Social science & medicine (1982), 66(7), 1588–1602. doi:10.1016/j.
socscimed.2007.11.037
Fries, J. F., Bruce, B., & Chakravarty, E. (2011). Compression of morbidity 1980-2011: A focused review
of paradigms and progress. Journal of Aging Research, 261702, 1–10. doi:10.4061/2011/261702
PMID:21876805
Fritz, S., & Lusardi, M. (2009). White paper: “walking speed: the sixth vital sign”. Journal of geriatric
physical therapy (2001), 32(2), 46–49.
64
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Fuller-Thomson, E., Ferreirinha, J., & Ahlin, K. M. (2023). Temporal Trends (from 2008 to 2017) in
Functional Limitations and Limitations in Activities of Daily Living: Findings from a Nationally Representative
Sample of 5.4 Million Older Americans. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health, 20(3), 2665. doi:10.3390/ijerph20032665 PMID:36768031
Gérin-Lajoie, M., Richards, C. L., & McFadyen, B. J. (2006). The circumvention of obstacles during
walking in different environmental contexts: A comparison between older and younger adults. Gait &
Posture, 24(3), 364–369. doi:10.1016/j.gaitpost.2005.11.001 PMID:16337384
Gill, T. M., Guo, Z., & Allore, H. G. (2006). The epidemiology of bathing disability in older persons.
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 54(10), 1524–1530. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00890.x
PMID:17038069
Gill, T. M., Han, L., & Allore, H. G. (2007). Bath aids and the subsequent development of bathing disability
in community-living older persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 55(11), 1757–1763.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01421.x PMID:17916117
Gill, T. M., Robison, J. T., & Tinetti, M. E. (1998). Difficulty and dependence: Two components of
the disability continuum among community-living older persons. Annals of Internal Medicine, 128(2),
96–101. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-128-2-199801150-00004 PMID:9441588
Glosser, G., Gallo, J., Duda, N., de Vries, J. J., Clark, C. M., & Grossman, M. (2002). Visual perceptual
functions predict instrumental activities of daily living in patients with dementia. Neuropsychiatry,
Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology, 15(3), 198–206. PMID:12218713
Graham, J. E., Ostir, G. V., Fisher, S. R., & Ottenbacher, K. J. (2008). Assessing walking speed in
clinical research: A systematic review. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 14(4), 552–562.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2753.2007.00917.x PMID:18462283
Gross, A. L., Rebok, G. W., Unverzagt, F. W., Willis, S. L., & Brandt, J. (2011). Cognitive predictors of
everyday functioning in older adults: Results from the ACTIVE Cognitive Intervention Trial. The Journals
of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66(5), 557–566. doi:10.1093/
geronb/gbr033 PMID:21558167
Guralnik, J. M., & Ferrucci, L. (2009). The challenge of understanding the disablement process in older
persons: Commentary responding to Jette AM. Toward a common language of disablement. The Journals
of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 64(11), 1169–1176. doi:10.1093/
gerona/glp094 PMID:19628636
Hardy, S. E., Perera, S., Roumani, Y. F., Chandler, J. M., & Studenski, S. A. (2007). Improvement in
usual gait speed predicts better survival in older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,
55(11), 1727–1734. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01413.x PMID:17916121
Hjaltadóttir, I., Hallberg, I. R., Ekwall, A. K., & Nyberg, P. (2011). Predicting mortality of residents
at admission to nursing home: A longitudinal cohort study. BMC Health Services Research, 11(1), 86.
doi:10.1186/1472-6963-11-86 PMID:21507213
65
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Hung, W. W., Ross, J. S., Boockvar, K. S., & Siu, A. L. (2011). Recent trends in chronic disease, impairment
and disability among older adults in the United States. BMC Geriatrics, 11(1), 47. doi:10.1186/1471-
2318-11-47 PMID:21851629
Jagger, C., Arthur, A. J., Spiers, N. A., & Clarke, M. (2001). Patterns of onset of disability in activities of
daily living with age. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 49(4), 404–409. doi:10.1046/j.1532-
5415.2001.49083.x PMID:11347783
Jefferson, A. L., Barakat, L. P., Giovannetti, T., Paul, R. H., & Glosser, G. (2006). Object perception
impairments predict instrumental activities of daily living dependence in Alzheimer’s disease. Journal
of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 28(6), 884–897. doi:10.1080/13803390591001034
PMID:16822730
Jefferson, A. L., Cahn-Weiner, D. A., Boyle, P. A., Paul, R. H., Moser, D. J., & Gordon, N. (2006).
Longitudinal changes in activities of daily living (ADLs) among patients with vascular dementia (VaD).
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(8), 752–754. doi:10.1002/gps.1556 PMID:16906630
Jefferson, A. L., Paul, R. H., Ozonoff, A., & Cohen, R. A. (2006). Evaluating elements of executive
functioning as predictors of instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs). Archives of clinical neuropsychology:
the official journal of the National Academy of Neuropsychologists, 21(4), 311–320.
doi:10.1016/j.acn.2006.03.007
Jette, A. M., Haley, S. M., & Kooyoomjian, J. T. (2003). Are the ICF Activity and Participation dimensions
distinct? Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, 35(3), 145–149. doi:10.1080/16501970310010501
PMID:12809198
Johnson, J. K., Lui, L. Y., & Yaffe, K. (2007). Executive function, more than global cognition, predicts
functional decline and mortality in elderly women. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological
Sciences and Medical Sciences, 62(10), 1134–1141. doi:10.1093/gerona/62.10.1134 PMID:17921427
Keeler, E., Guralnik, J. M., Tian, H., Wallace, R. B., & Reuben, D. B. (2010). The impact of functional
status on life expectancy in older persons. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences
and Medical Sciences, 65(7), 727–733. doi:10.1093/gerona/glq029 PMID:20363833
Kempen, G. I., Myers, A. M., & Powell, L. E. (1995). Hierarchical structure in ADL and IADL: Analytical
assumptions and applications for clinicians and researchers. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology,
48(11), 1299–1305. doi:10.1016/0895-4356(95)00043-7 PMID:7490592
Kingston, A., Collerton, J., Davies, K., Bond, J., Robinson, L., & Jagger, C. (2012). Losing the ability
in activities of daily living in the oldest old: A hierarchic disability scale from the Newcastle 85+ study.
PLoS One, 7(2), e31665. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031665 PMID:22355385
Lawton, M. P., & Brody, E. M. (1969). Assessment of older people: Self-maintaining and instrumental
activities of daily living. The Gerontologist, 9(3), 179–186. doi:10.1093/geront/9.3_Part_1.179
PMID:5349366
Lee, J., Lau, S., Meijer, E., & Hu, P. (2020). Living Longer, With or Without Disability? A Global and
Longitudinal Perspective. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences,
75(1), 162–167. doi:10.1093/gerona/glz007 PMID:30629214
66
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Leonardi, M. (2010). Measuring health and disability: Supporting policy development. The European
MHADIE project. Disability and Rehabilitation, 32(sup1, Suppl 1), S1–S8. doi:10.3109/09638288.20
10.520806 PMID:20874446
Leonardi, M., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Hollenweger, J., Pessina, A., & Bickenbach, J. E. (2012). Multidisciplinary
research and training network on health and disability in Europe: The MURINET project.
American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 91(13, Suppl 1), S1–S4. doi:10.1097/
PHM.0b013e31823d699e PMID:22193330
Leonardi, M., Chatterji, S., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Hollenweger, J., Ustün, B., Kostanjsek, N. F., Newton,
A., Björck-Åkesson, E., Francescutti, C., Alonso, J., Matucci, M., Samoilescu, A., Good, A., Cieza, A.,
Svestkova, O., Bullinger, M., Marincek, C., Burger, H., Raggi, A., & Bickenbach, J. E. (2010). Integrating
research into policy planning: MHADIE policy recommendations. Disability and Rehabilitation,
32(sup1, Suppl 1), S139–S147. doi:10.3109/09638288.2010.520807 PMID:20874663
Lollar, D. J., & Crews, J. E. (2003). Redefining the role of public health in disability. Annual Review of
Public Health, 24(1), 195–208. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.24.100901.140844 PMID:12668756
Martin, L. G., Schoeni, R. F., & Andreski, P. M. (2010). Trends in health of older adults in the United
States: past, present, future. Demography, 47 Suppl(Suppl 1), S17–S40. doi:10.1353/dem.2010.0003
Masala, C., & Petretto, D. R. (2008). From disablement to enablement: Conceptual models of disability
in the 20th century. Disability and Rehabilitation, 30(17), 1233–1244. doi:10.1080/09638280701602418
PMID:18821191
McDermott, S., & Turk, M. A. (2011). The myth and reality of disability prevalence: Measuring disability
for research and service. Disability and Health Journal, 4(1), 1–5. doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2010.06.002
PMID:21168800
Mitchell, M., & Miller, L. S. (2008). Prediction of functional status in older adults: The ecological
validity of four Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System tests. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 30(6), 683–690. doi:10.1080/13803390701679893 PMID:18608647
Nagi, S. Z. (1976). An epidemiology of disability among adults in the United States. The Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly. Health and Society, 54(4), 439–467. doi:10.2307/3349677 PMID:137366
Naik, A. D., Concato, J., & Gill, T. M. (2004). Bathing disability in community-living older persons:
Common, consequential, and complex. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 52(11), 1805–1810.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52513.x PMID:15507055
Naik, A. D., & Gill, T. M. (2005). Underutilization of environmental adaptations for bathing in communityliving
older persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(9), 1497–1503. doi:10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2005.53458.x PMID:16137278
Ostchega, Y., Dillon, C. F., Lindle, R., Carroll, M., & Hurley, B. F. (2004). Isokinetic leg muscle strength
in older americans and its relationship to a standardized walk test: Data from the national health and
nutrition examination survey 1999-2000. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 52(6), 977–982.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52268.x PMID:15161465
67
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Rector, J. L., Marceau, K., & Friedman, E. M. (2020). Moderation of the Association Between Chronic
Medical Conditions and Functional Limitations Over Time by Physical Activity: Effects of Age. The Journals
of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 75(1), 168–174. doi:10.1093/
gerona/glz020 PMID:30783672
Riegelman, R., & Kirkwood, B. (2014). Public Health 101. Healthy People – Healthy Populations (2nd
ed.). Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
Royall, D. R., Palmer, R., Chiodo, L. K., & Polk, M. J. (2004). Declining executive control in normal
aging predicts change in functional status: The Freedom House Study. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 52(3), 346–352. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52104.x PMID:14962147
Sakari, R., Era, P., Rantanen, T., Leskinen, E., Laukkanen, P., & Heikkinen, E. (2010). Mobility performance
and its sensory, psychomotor and musculoskeletal determinants from age 75 to age 80. Aging
Clinical and Experimental Research, 22(1), 47–53. doi:10.1007/BF03324815 PMID:20305367
Schoeni, R. F., Freedman, V. A., & Martin, L. G. (2008). Why is late-life disability declining? The Milbank
Quarterly, 86(1), 47–89. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2007.00513.x PMID:18307477
Stucki, G., Reinhardt, J. D., Grimby, G., & Melvin, J. (2008). Developing research capacity in human
functioning and rehabilitation research from the comprehensive perspective based on the ICF-model.
European Journal of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 44(3), 343–351. PMID:18762743
Studenski, S. (2003). Mobility. In W. R. Hazzard, J. P. Blass, & J. B. Halter (Eds.), Principles of Geriatric
Medicine and Gerontology (5th ed., pp. 947–960). McGraw-Hill.
Studenski, S., Perera, S., Patel, K., Rosano, C., Faulkner, K., Inzitari, M., Brach, J., Chandler, J., Cawthon,
P., Connor, E. B., Nevitt, M., Visser, M., Kritchevsky, S., Badinelli, S., Harris, T., Newman, A. B., Cauley,
J., Ferrucci, L., & Guralnik, J. (2011). Gait speed and survival in older adults. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 305(1), 50–58. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1923 PMID:21205966
Studenski, S., Perera, S., Wallace, D., Chandler, J. M., Duncan, P. W., Rooney, E., Fox, M., & Guralnik,
J. M. (2003). Physical performance measures in the clinical setting. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 51(3), 314–322. doi:10.1046/j.1532-5415.2003.51104.x PMID:12588574
Sunderland, A., Walker, C. M., & Walker, M. F. (2006). Action errors and dressing disability after
stroke: An ecological approach to neuropsychological assessment and intervention. Neuropsychological
Rehabilitation, 16(6), 666–683. doi:10.1080/09602010500204385 PMID:17127572
Thonnard, J. L., & Penta, M. (2007). Functional assessment in physiotherapy. A literature review. Europa
Medicophysica, 43(4), 525–541. PMID:18084177
Verbrugge, L. M., & Jette, A. M. (1994). The disablement process. Social science & medicine (1982),
38(1), 1–14. doi:10.1016/0277-9536(94)90294-1
Viccaro, L. J., Perera, S., & Studenski, S. A. (2011). Is timed up and go better than gait speed in predicting
health, function, and falls in older adults? Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 59(5), 887–892.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03336.x PMID:21410448
68
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Walker, C. M., Sunderland, A., Sharma, J., & Walker, M. F. (2004). The impact of cognitive impairment
on upper body dressing difficulties after stroke: A video analysis of patterns of recovery. Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 75(1), 43–48. PMID:14707306
Walker, M. F., Sunderland, A., Fletcher-Smith, J., Drummond, A., Logan, P., Edmans, J. A., Garvey, K.,
Dineen, R. A., Ince, P., Horne, J., Fisher, R. J., & Taylor, J. L. (2012). The DRESS trial: A feasibility
randomized controlled trial of a neuropsychological approach to dressing therapy for stroke inpatients.
Clinical Rehabilitation, 26(8), 675–685. doi:10.1177/0269215511431089 PMID:22180445
Watson, N. L., Rosano, C., Boudreau, R. M., Simonsick, E. M., Ferrucci, L., Sutton-Tyrrell, K., Hardy, S.
E., Atkinson, H. H., Yaffe, K., Satterfield, S., Harris, T. B., Newman, A. B., & Health, A. B. C. (2010).
Executive function, memory, and gait speed decline in well-functioning older adults. The Journals of
Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 65(10), 1093–1100. doi:10.1093/
gerona/glq111 PMID:20581339
Weiss, C. O., Fried, L. P., & Bandeen-Roche, K. (2007). Exploring the hierarchy of mobility performance
in high-functioning older women. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences
and Medical Sciences, 62(2), 167–173. doi:10.1093/gerona/62.2.167 PMID:17339641
WHO. (1980). International Classification of Impairment, Disabilities and Handicaps: a manual of
classification relating the consequences of disease. World Health Organization.
WHO. (2001). The International Classification Functioning, Disability and Health. World Health Organization.
WHO. (2015). World report on ageing and health. WHO.
Wilkie, R., Peat, G., Thomas, E., & Croft, P. (2007). Factors associated with participation restriction in
community-dwelling adults aged 50 years and over. Quality of Life Research: An International Journal
of Quality of Life Aspects of Treatment, Care and Rehabilitation, 16(7), 1147–1156. doi:10.100711136-
007-9221-5 PMID:17530446
Wrisley, D. M., & Kumar, N. A. (2010). Functional gait assessment: Concurrent, discriminative, and
predictive validity in community-dwelling older adults. Physical Therapy, 90(5), 761–773. doi:10.2522/
ptj.20090069 PMID:20360052
Zelada, M. A., Salinas, R., & Baztán, J. J. (2009). Reduction of functional deterioration during hospitalization
in an acute geriatric unit. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 48(1), 35–39. doi:10.1016/j.
archger.2007.09.008 PMID:18022709
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Barriers: These are contextual factors that, through their absence or presence, limit the functioning
and cause disability.
Capacity: This is the activity qualifier and describes the aptitude of an individual to perform a task
or action in a standardized environment. this one construct aims to indicate the maximum level of functioning
that a person can achieve in a given domain, at a given time.
69
Reflections on Functioning and Disability in Aging and Public Health
﻿
Disability: This is a generic term for disabilities, activity limitations and participation restrictions.
indicates the negative aspects between an individual (with a health condition) and its contextual factors.
Facilitators: These are contextual factors that, through their absence or presence, improve the
functioning and reduce the disability of a person. facilitators can prevent an impairment or limitation
of activity becomes a restriction of participation, since the actual performance of a stock is improved
despite of the person’s problem related to the capacity.
Functioning: This is a generic term for the functions of the body, body structures, activities and
participation. indicates the positive aspects of the interaction between an individual (with a health condition)
and its contextual factors.
Model Of Functioning, Disability And Health: It is a multidimensional and multidetermined model
that relates biological, individual and social aspects in the interaction with contextual factors.
Performance: It is the participation qualifier and describes what the individual does in their usual
living environment. as this environment includes a social context, the performance can also be understood
as “involvement in a life situation” or “the lived experience”, people in the real context in which they live.
Person-Centered Approach: This model suggests that the patient is the protagonist of his own
health and places him in the focus of the intervention, as an active participant in setting priorities and
making decisions for care.
Section 2
The importance of the education of the elderly is highlighted through an individual physical exercise
program using everyday objects and equine-assisted therapy programs to promote wellbeing and prevent
falls.
Health Promotion and Disease
Prevention:
Intervention and Implications
71
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 5
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch005
ABSTRACT
This chapter examines the effectiveness of the PERMA model of wellbeing in enhancing reminiscence in
elderly individuals. Reminiscence is a process of recollecting past experiences, events, and memories, and
it is commonly used as a therapeutic intervention to promote wellbeing in the elderly. The PERMA model
integrates positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment to enhance overall
wellbeing. This chapter focuses on how the model can promote reminiscence and improve psychological
wellbeing, social connectedness, and reduce depression and anxiety. The PERMA Model was chosen
for its holistic approach and positive effects on the elderly population. It is important to incorporate the
PERMA model in enhancing reminiscence and to promote positive aging and enhance quality of life.
INTRODUCTION
Our chapter will try to expose a conceptual approach of the PERMA model of wellbeing in enhancing
reminiscence in elderly individuals. Through a literature review, will address the concepts and theoretical
constructs of the PERMA model, and its contribution to enhancing reminiscence and promoting positive
aging and enhance the quality of life.
Aging and Its Impact on Self-Identity
With aging comes the accumulation of memories and experiences that can shape a person’s sense of self
and identity. As individuals age, they are more likely to experience a decline in physical and cognitive
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing:
A Comprehensive Framework for
Enhancing Reminiscence in the Elderly
Aastha Dhingra
SGT University, India
Waheeda Khan
SGT University, India
72
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
abilities, which can lead to feelings of loss and diminished self-worth. Reminiscence is a mental activity
in which people recollect past events and experiences, often with a sense of nostalgia or sentimentality.
This process of reminiscing is not only a natural and common aspect of human life, but it can also play
a significant role in promoting mental health and well-being.
As it is a natural human tendency to look back on the events and experiences that have shaped our
lives, reminiscence offers a way to make sense of our past and present. It can involve reflecting on happy
or difficult memories, people who have influenced our lives, or significant events that have occurred.
Reminiscence can take many forms, from storytelling to looking through old photo albums, and it can
be done alone or in a group setting.
Definition of Reminiscence
Reminiscence refers to the act of recollecting past experiences or events, often with the aim of reliving
pleasant memories, processing unresolved emotions, or enhancing personal identity and social connections.
It involves reflecting on personal narratives, stories, and experiences that hold significance and
meaning to an individual, regardless of whether they are positive, negative, or neutral. In the context of
aging and elderly care, reminiscence therapy is often used as a form of intervention to promote mental
and emotional wellbeing, as well as to mitigate the effects of cognitive decline and social isolation.
One of the earliest definitions of reminiscence was given by William James in his book, “The Principles
of Psychology” (1890). He defined reminiscence as “the act of remembering or recalling past
experiences, events, or memories.” Since then, several psychologists have expanded on this definition
and have studied the phenomenon of reminiscence in various contexts, such as in the elderly, in therapy,
and in cultural contexts.
Reminiscence has been recognized as an important aspect of psychological well-being, particularly
for older adults. Engaging in reminiscence can help individuals to preserve their identity, establish meaning
and purpose in life, and promote a sense of continuity across their lifespan. For individuals facing
the challenges of aging, such as declining physical health, social isolation, and loss of independence,
reminiscence can be a source of comfort and solace. It can also help to promote social connections and
facilitate intergenerational communication and understanding.
Reminiscence has gained attention in recent years as a therapeutic intervention for older adults. Studies
have shown that reminiscence therapy can be effective in improving cognitive functioning, reducing
symptoms of depression and anxiety, and enhancing the quality of life. Reminiscence interventions have
taken many forms, including life review therapy, guided autobiography, and memory work. These interventions
often draw on the principles of narrative therapy, which recognizes the power of storytelling in
shaping our lives and sense of self.
Importance of Reminiscence in the Elderly
Reminiscence has been found to have significant impacts on psychological well-being, social connectedness,
and even physical health among older adults. Additionally, reminiscence can be a powerful tool
for preserving cultural and personal histories, fostering intergenerational relationships, and promoting
feelings of meaning and purpose in life. Moreover, reminiscence interventions have been developed
and tested in various contexts, such as in long-term care facilities, community settings, and individual
73
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
therapy. By examining the effects of reminiscence on these outcomes, researchers can contribute to the
development of effective interventions that can enhance the well-being of older adults.
Therefore, focusing on reminiscence as a variable of interest in a study can provide valuable insights
into the role of this process in promoting positive outcomes for older adults, and may contribute to the
development of effective interventions to improve their quality of life.
However, studying the impact of reminiscence on mental health and well-being has been a particular
focus in gerontology research. This is because the process of aging can be accompanied by numerous
challenges, such as declines in physical and cognitive abilities, social isolation, and the loss of loved
ones. These challenges can lead to feelings of depression, anxiety, and diminished self-worth.
Importance of Reminiscence for Psychological Well-Being
Reminiscence has been found to be a particularly effective tool for older adults in promoting psychological
well-being, as it can help them process and come to terms with these challenges, while also fostering
a sense of purpose and meaning in their lives. For example, reminiscing about past accomplishments
and relationships can help older adults maintain a positive self-image, while recalling past struggles and
how they overcame them can promote a sense of resilience and self-efficacy. Additionally, reminiscing
about positive experiences can lead to increased positive affect and decreased negative affect, which can
improve overall mood and quality of life.
According to a systematic review of reminiscence therapy by Pinquart and Forstmeier (2012), the
majority of studies on reminiscence therapy have been conducted with elderly populations, particularly
those in residential care settings.
In a study by Webster and Haight (2017), the authors reviewed research on reminiscence across the
lifespan and found that most studies have focused on older adults.
A review of research on reminiscence in the context of psychotherapy by Staudinger and colleagues
(2015) found that the majority of studies have focused on older adults, with only a small number of
studies examining reminiscence in younger populations.
A study by Maercker and colleagues (2016) found that while reminiscence has been found to be a
valuable tool for promoting mental health and well-being across the lifespan, the majority of studies
have focused on older adults.
Given the unique challenges that older adults face, studying the impact of reminiscence on their mental
health and well-being can provide valuable insights into how to support this population. By understanding
the mechanisms through which reminiscence promotes psychological well-being, researchers and
practitioners can develop interventions that leverage this process to improve the lives of older adults.
Thus, while reminiscence may be a relevant variable to study across different age groups, focusing on
its impact on older adults can provide important insights into how to promote healthy aging.
Wellbeing Models in Relation to Elderly Reminiscence
There are several models of wellbeing that have been studied in relation to their impact on reminiscence
in the elderly population. Models such as the Self-Determination Theory, the Ryff and Singer Model of
Psychological Well-Being, and the Multidimensional Model of Well-Being etc have also been shown to
have positive effects on reminiscence in the elderly. These models focus on different aspects of wellbeing
such as autonomy, personal growth, self-acceptance, purpose in life, and positive relationships, and
74
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
offer different approaches to promoting reminiscence in the elderly. Understanding the strengths and
limitations of different models of wellbeing can help researchers and practitioners design more effective
interventions to promote wellbeing and enhance quality of life in the elderly population.
a) The Self-Determination Theory (SDT) is a model of motivation and personality that emphasizes the
importance of three basic psychological needs: autonomy, competence, and relatedness. According
to the SDT, when individuals feel a sense of autonomy and control over their lives, they are more
likely to engage in activities that promote positive psychological outcomes, such as reminiscing
about their life experiences. Research has shown that the SDT model is associated with greater
reminiscence and wellbeing in elderly individuals.
b) The Ryff and Singer Model of Psychological Well-Being (PWBM) is a multidimensional model that
focuses on six dimensions of psychological wellbeing: autonomy, personal growth, self-acceptance,
purpose in life, positive relationships, and environmental mastery. The model suggests that a balance
across these dimensions can lead to overall psychological wellbeing, including the promotion of
reminiscence in elderly individuals. Studies have shown that individuals who have higher levels of
psychological wellbeing, as measured by the PWBM, tend to have more positive attitudes towards
reminiscence.
c) The Multidimensional Model of Well-Being (MMWB) is another model that highlights the importance
of multiple dimensions of wellbeing, including physical, social, emotional, and spiritual
wellbeing. The MMWB suggests that interventions designed to promote wellbeing should target
multiple dimensions to achieve optimal outcomes. Research has shown that interventions based
on the MMWB can lead to improved reminiscence and psychological wellbeing in the elderly
population.
d) The “guided autobiography” model: In a study by Wang and colleagues (2019), the authors used
the guided autobiography model to promote reminiscence in older adults. The intervention involved
a series of guided sessions where participants were encouraged to write about their life experiences.
The authors found that the intervention led to significant improvements in well-being and
life satisfaction.
e) The “life review” model: In a study by Pinquart and Forstmeier (2012), the authors reviewed studies
on the effectiveness of life review interventions in promoting reminiscence in older adults. They
found that life review interventions were effective in improving mental health outcomes, such as
depression, anxiety, and self-esteem.
f) The “autobiographical memory specificity training” model: In a study by Renner and colleagues
(2017), the authors used autobiographical memory specificity training to promote reminiscence
in older adults with depression. The intervention involved training participants to recall specific
memories from their past, rather than general memories. The authors found that the intervention
led to significant reductions in depression symptoms.
g) The “positive reminiscence” model: In a study by Wildschut and colleagues (2016), the authors
examined the effectiveness of a positive reminiscence intervention in promoting well-being in older
adults. The intervention involved recalling positive memories and sharing them with others. The
authors found that the intervention led to significant improvements in well-being, particularly in
terms of positive affect and life satisfaction.
75
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
Overall, these studies suggest that a variety of models can be effective in promoting reminiscence in
the elderly population. These models may involve different techniques, such as guided writing, life review,
autobiographical memory specificity training, or positive reminiscence. By understanding the strengths
and limitations of these different models, researchers and practitioners can develop interventions that
are tailored to the needs and preferences of older adults, promoting their mental health and well-being.
In recent years, researchers have been exploring the impact of the PERMA model on various populations,
including the elderly. One area of particular interest has been the impact of the PERMA model
on reminiscence among the elderly.
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
The PERMA model of well-being is a framework developed by psychologist Martin Seligman that
outlines five key elements of well-being: Positive Emotion, Engagement, Relationships, Meaning, and
Accomplishment. There is evidence to suggest that this model can be effective in promoting reminiscence
in the elderly population. Here are a few ways in which the PERMA model may be particularly
effective in this context:
Positive Emotion: The Positive Emotion element of the PERMA model emphasizes the importance of
experiencing positive emotions, such as joy, gratitude, and contentment. In the context of reminiscence,
focusing on positive memories and emotions can help older adults to feel more positive about their lives
and experiences. For example, a reminiscence program that encourages participants to share positive
memories and experiences with one another may be particularly effective in promoting positive emotion
and well-being in older adults.
Engagement: The Engagement element of the PERMA model emphasizes the importance of being
fully engaged and absorbed in activities that are meaningful and enjoyable. In the context of reminiscence,
this might involve encouraging older adults to engage in activities that are personally meaningful
to them, such as writing their life story or participating in group reminiscence sessions. By promoting
engagement and involvement in these activities, the PERMA model may be particularly effective in
promoting reminiscence in older adults.
Relationships: The Relationships element of the PERMA model emphasizes the importance of social
connections and positive relationships. In the context of reminiscence, focusing on relationships may
involve encouraging older adults to share their memories and experiences with others, fostering a sense
of connection and community. This can help to reduce social isolation and promote well-being in older
adults.
Meaning: The Meaning element of the PERMA model emphasizes the importance of finding meaning
and purpose in life. In the context of reminiscence, this might involve encouraging older adults to reflect
on the meaning and significance of their life experiences, and to find ways to integrate these experiences
into their sense of self and identity. By promoting a sense of meaning and purpose, the PERMA model
may be particularly effective in promoting well-being and positive outcomes in older adults.
Accomplishments: Accomplishments refer to the sense of achievement and mastery that comes from
working towards and achieving goals. In the context of reminiscence, accomplishments may refer to
reflecting on past achievements and successes, as well as the challenges and obstacles that were overcome
to achieve these accomplishments. By focusing on accomplishments, reminiscence can provide
a sense of meaning and purpose to individuals, particularly those in the later stages of life who may be
reflecting on their life’s work and legacy.
76
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
Focus of the Study on Reminiscence as a Variable in PERMA Model
There have been several research studies that have compared the effectiveness of different models of
well-being with the PERMA model, with a particular focus on the impact of these models on reminiscence
in the elderly. Here are a few examples:
In a study by Zhou and colleagues (2021), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “holistic wellness” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults.
The study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that the
PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions.
In a study by Kalaw and colleagues (2020), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “meaningful life” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults. The
study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that the
PERMA model was more effective in reducing depression symptoms.
In a study by Otero-Lopez and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the
PERMA model with the “authentic happiness” model in promoting reminiscence in older adults. The
study found that both models were effective in promoting reminiscence, but that the PERMA model was
more effective in improving well-being outcomes such as life satisfaction and happiness.
In a study by Ng and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA model
with the “self-determination theory” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults.
The study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that the
PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions.
In a study by Schuurmans and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “self-compassion” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults
with depression. The study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reducing
depression symptoms, but that the PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions.
In a study by Kühner and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “vitality” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults. The study
found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that the PERMA
model was more effective in reducing depression symptoms.
In a study by Huang and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “resilience” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults with chronic
illness. The study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but
that the PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions.
In a study by Pinto and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “meaning in life” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults. The
study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that the
PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions.
In a study by Yang and colleagues (2019), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “acceptance and commitment therapy” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence
in older adults with depression. The study found that both models were effective in promoting wellbeing
and reducing depression symptoms, but that the PERMA model was more effective in promoting
positive emotions.
In a study by Li and colleagues (2018), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA model
with the “cognitive-behavioral” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults with
77
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
depression. The study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reducing
depression symptoms, but that the PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions
and reducing negative emotions.
In a study by Wang and colleagues (2018), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “resilience” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults with chronic
pain. The study found that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that
the PERMA model was more effective in promoting positive emotions and reducing negative emotions.
In a study by Jiang and colleagues (2018), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA
model with the “mindfulness-based stress reduction” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence
In a study by Luo and colleagues (2017), the authors compared the effectiveness of the PERMA model
with the “flourishing” model in promoting well-being and reminiscence in older adults. The study found
that both models were effective in promoting well-being and reminiscence, but that the PERMA model
was more effective in promoting positive emotions and reducing negative emotions.
Thus, it can be said that PERMA model of well-being may be effective in promoting reminiscence
in the elderly population by emphasizing key elements such as positive emotion, engagement, relationships,
meaning and accomplishments. By tailoring reminiscence interventions to focus on these elements,
researchers and practitioners may be able to promote mental health and well-being in older adults.
Huta and Ryan (2010) conducted a study to investigate the differential effects of hedonic and eudemonic
motives on well-being. They found that both types of motives were positively associated with
well-being, but that eudemonic motives had a stronger and more lasting impact. Eudemonic motives
are those that relate to a sense of meaning and purpose, while hedonic motives are focused on pleasure
and enjoyment.
Application of the PERMA Model in Enhancing Reminiscence in the Elderly
Several studies have explored the relationship between the PERMA model and reminiscence in the
elderly population.
Lam, Wong, and Law (2015) investigated the impact of a life review intervention using guided autobiography
on the reminiscence of community-dwelling elderly adults. The pilot study included 30 participants
aged 60 and above who were randomly assigned to either the intervention group or the control
group. The intervention group received eight weekly 2-hour sessions of guided autobiography, which
aimed to facilitate the participants’ reflection on their past experiences and achievements using prompts
and feedback from group members. The control group received no intervention. The study found that the
intervention group showed significant improvement in reminiscence, as measured by the Reminiscence
Functions Scale (RFS), compared to the control group. The RFS measures the extent to which individuals
use reminiscence for different functions, such as resolving conflicts or maintaining self-identity. The
intervention group also reported significantly higher levels of positive emotion, engagement, and meaning
in life, as measured by the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule and the Life Engagement Test.
The results of this pilot study suggest that a life review intervention using guided autobiography based
on the PERMA model can have a positive impact on the reminiscence of community-dwelling elderly
adults. The study also highlights the importance of incorporating positive psychology principles, such as
the PERMA model, in interventions for older adults, as they can help promote well-being and enhance
their quality of life. However, further research with a larger sample size and longer follow-up period is
needed to confirm the effectiveness of this intervention.
78
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
A study by Zeng et al. (2019) found that older adults who reported higher levels of positive emotions,
engagement, positive relationships, meaning, and achievement also reported higher levels of reminiscence.
The authors suggest that the PERMA model provides a useful framework for understanding the
factors that contribute to positive reminiscence in older adults.
Another study by Shi et al. (2019) explored the impact of a positive reminiscence intervention based
on the PERMA model. The intervention involved a series of group sessions in which participants were
encouraged to reflect on positive experiences from their past and to identify the PERMA components
that were present in those experiences. The results showed that participants who received the intervention
reported higher levels of well-being and lower levels of depressive symptoms compared to a control group.
Overall, the research suggests that the PERMA model can be a useful framework for promoting wellbeing
and enhancing reminiscence in the elderly population. By focusing on the elements of positive
emotions, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment, interventions can help older adults
reflect on positive experiences and find meaning and purpose in their lives. This can have a positive
impact on their mental and physical health, and improve their overall well-being.
All things considered, the PERMA model of wellbeing provides a comprehensive framework for
enhancing reminiscence in the elderly. The model focuses on five essential elements of wellbeing, including
positive emotions, engagement, relationships, meaning, and achievement. By addressing each
of these elements, the model can help seniors feel a sense of purpose, connectedness, and happiness,
which can promote cognitive function and overall quality of life.
Several studies have suggested that interventions based on the PERMA model can be effective in
enhancing the wellbeing of the elderly, including those with cognitive impairment. For instance, activities
that promote positive emotions, such as gratitude journaling and mindfulness meditation, can improve
mood and reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety. Similarly, activities that foster engagement, such
as hobbies and games, can improve cognitive function and enhance social connections.
CONCLUSION
Despite the promising findings, there are some limitations to using the PERMA model in the elderly
population. For instance, the model may not be suitable for seniors who have severe cognitive impairment
or advanced stages of dementia. Additionally, some of the activities that promote wellbeing may
not be accessible or enjoyable for all seniors, depending on their interests and abilities.
Moving forward, future research should focus on developing more personalized interventions based
on the PERMA model that can be tailored to individual needs and preferences. This could involve using
technology such as virtual reality to create immersive and interactive reminiscence experiences that
promote engagement and meaningful connections.
To sum up, the PERMA model of wellbeing provides a valuable framework for enhancing reminiscence
in the elderly. By promoting positive emotions, engagement, relationships, meaning, and achievement,
the model can help seniors feel a sense of purpose, connectedness, and happiness. While there are some
limitations to using the model, future research should focus on developing more personalized interventions
that can be tailored to individual needs and preferences. Ultimately, by promoting wellbeing in the
elderly, we can help them live more fulfilling and meaningful lives.
79
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
REFERENCES
Bohlmeijer, E., Lamers, S. M. A., & Fledderus, M. (2015). Flourishing in people with depressive
symptomatology increases with Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Postgraduate Medical Journal,
91(1081), 94–100. doi:10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-132682 PMID:25596344
Cavanaugh, J. C., & Blanchard-Fields, F. (2006). Adult development and aging (5th ed.). Thomson
Wadsworth.
Choi, E. (2015). Effects of a reminiscence program on depression, activities of daily living, and quality
of life of older adults in senior centers. Journal of Korean Academy of Nursing, 45(4), 565–575.
doi:10.4040/jkan.2015.45.4.565 PMID:26364531
Gaggioli, A., Morganti, L., Bonfiglio, S., Scaratti, C., Cipresso, P., Serino, S., & Riva, G. (2014). Intergenerational
group reminiscence: A potentially effective intervention to enhance elderly psychosocial
wellbeing and to improve children’s perception of aging. Educational Gerontology, 40(7), 486–498. do
i:10.1080/03601277.2013.844042
Hallford, D. J., & Mellor, D. (2016). Reminiscence and the well-being of elderly women. Journal of
Women & Aging, 28(3), 226–234. doi:10.1080/08952841.2015.1094952
Huang, C., Weng, S., & Lee, S. (2019). The effectiveness of a resilience-based intervention on psychological
well-being and stress in older adults with chronic illness. The Journal of Nursing Research,
27(5), e43. doi:10.1097/JNR.0000000000000315 PMID:31524854
Huta, V., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). Pursuing pleasure or virtue: The differential and overlapping wellbeing
benefits of hedonic and eudaimonic motives. Journal of Happiness Studies, 11(6), 735–762.
doi:10.100710902-009-9171-4
Jiang, J., Rickson, D., Feng, Y., & Shi, Y. (2018). Mindfulness-based stress reduction and group reminiscence
therapy for older adults with depression: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Applied
Gerontology, 37(8), 935–954. doi:10.1177/0733464816659539
Kalaw, E., Peck, K., Tan, L., & Liu, S. (2020). PERMA and meaningful life models: Positive psychology
constructs in reminiscence and well-being. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 63(8), 764–776. do
i:10.1080/01634372.2020.1742613
Kühner, C., Bürger, C., Keller, F., Hautzinger, M., & Bradlowski, M. (2019). A comparative study of
two positive psychology interventions for depressed patients. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 75(9),
1582–1600. doi:10.1002/jclp.22779
Lam, C. S., Wong, J. W., & Law, L. S. (2015). A life review intervention using guided autobiography for
community-dwelling elderly adults: A pilot study. The Gerontologist, 55(6), 1030–1037. doi:10.1093/
geront/gnv006
Ng, H. K., Cheung, R., Poon, C. Y. M., Lee, S. S., & Chan, W. M. (2019). Positive psychology interventions
in enhancing elderly’s well-being: A comparison between reminiscence therapy and self-determination
theory. Aging & Mental Health, 23(1), 96–102. doi:10.1080/13607863.2017.1399379
80
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
Pinquart, M., & Forstmeier, S. (2012). Effects of reminiscence interventions on psychosocial outcomes:
A meta-analysis. Aging & Mental Health, 16(5), 541–558. doi:10.1080/13607863.2011.65143
4 PMID:22304736
Pinto, J. M., Fontes, A., Paredes, J., & Santos, S. (2019). Promoting reminiscence through a meaning
in life intervention with older adults. European Journal of Ageing, 16(2), 221–230. doi:10.100710433-
018-0494-x
Ryff, C. D., & Singer, B. H. (2008). Know thyself and become what you are: A eudaimonic approach
to psychological well-being. Journal of Happiness Studies, 9(1), 13–39. doi:10.100710902-006-9019-0
Schuurmans, N., Comijs, H. C., Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Winkel, F. W., & van den Berg, J. F. (2019).
The effectiveness of a self-compassion intervention for older adults experiencing depressive symptoms:
A randomized controlled trial. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 34(12), 1841–1851.
doi:10.1002/gps.5199
Seligman, M. E. P. (2011). Flourish: A visionary new understanding of happiness and well-being. Free
Press.
Serrano, J. P., Latorre, J. M., Gatz, M., & Montorio, I. (2018). Effectiveness of cognitive stimulation
therapy for older adults with depressive symptoms: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry and Neurology, 31(4), 173–182. doi:10.1177/0891988718780822
Tan, J. A., & Wong, F. C. (2019). An exploration of the effects of a reminiscence group on well-being
among elderly residents in a nursing home. Asian Journal of Gerontology & Geriatrics, 14(1), 14–20.
doi:10.3126/ajgg.v14i1.23231
Thompson, T., Futterman, A., Gallagher-Thompson, D., Rose, J., Lovett, S., & Reiser, R. (2019).
Telephone-based reminiscence therapy for rural dwelling individuals with dementia and their family
caregivers: A pilot study. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 62(6), 615–628. doi:10.1080/01634
372.2019.1580316
Topooco, N., Riper, H., Araya, R., Berking, M., Brunn, M., Chevreul, K., Cieslak, R., & Clougherty, K.
F. (2017). Attitudes towards digital treatment for depression: A European stakeholder survey. Internet
Interventions: the Application of Information Technology in Mental and Behavioural Health, 8, 1–9.
doi:10.1016/j.invent.2017.01.001 PMID:30135823
Wang, X., & Li, L. (2018). A randomized controlled trial of reminiscence therapy on depression and
apathy in elderly nursing home residents. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 8(8), 28–34.
doi:10.5430/jnep.v8n8p28
Wang, X., & Zheng, Y. (2019). The effectiveness of reminiscence therapy on the improvement of elderly
depression: A meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research, 272, 181–191. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.114
Webster, J. D. (2003). An exploratory analysis of a self-assessed wisdom scale. Journal of Adult Development,
10(1), 13–22. doi:10.1023/A:1020782619051
81
The PERMA Model of Wellbeing
﻿
Wu, L. F., Lin, Y. S., & Chen, S. C. (2016). A reminiscence program intervention to improve psychological
well-being of institutionalized elderly. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 66, 143–149.
doi:10.1016/j.archger.2016.04.011
Yeh, Y. C., & Wang, Y. C. (2017). The effects of reminiscence therapy on psychological well-being,
depression, and loneliness among the institutionalized aged. International Journal of Gerontology, 11(2),
100–104. doi:10.1016/j.ijge.2016.07.006
Zhang, Y., Li, H., & Zou, Y. (2019). The effect of self-concept on the relationship between reminiscence
therapy and mental health among Chinese elderly: A latent interaction model. Current Psychology (New
Brunswick, N.J.), 38(4), 853–859. doi:10.100712144-017-9652-2
Zhang, Y., Zhang, L., Sun, Y., & Chen, Y. (2019). Effects of reminiscence therapy on cognitive functions,
depression, and quality of life in Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis. Journal of the American
Medical Directors Association, 20(9), 1114–1122. doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2019.03.022
Zhou, W., Chen, W., & Wang, Z. (2019). Study on the effects of reminiscence therapy on elderly depression.
International Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 23(3), 194–199. doi:10.1080/13651501
.2019.1581582 PMID:30848166
Zhu, L. J., Yu, J., Zhang, R., & Hu, Z. W. (2019). The efficacy of reminiscence therapy for elderly
patients with cognitive impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Alzheimer’s
Disease, 67(1), 331–343. doi:10.3233/JAD-180576
82
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 6
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch006
ABSTRACT
To provide a physical activity (PA) program for older people, capable of offering lasting psychomotor
benefits, it is necessary to prescribe exercises directed to their real needs. Moreover, to improve the
quality of life of ageing people, it is important to apply an appropriate PA methodology in terms of intensity,
volume, frequency, and progression, minimizing the physiological aspects that may be affected,
such as cardiorespiratory function, among others. This chapter’s main objective is to present a PA
program for older people, which can be carried out with very simple materials and is accessible to any
elderly person, being structured in three distinct phases. The first phase encompasses joint and organic
mobilization. The second includes the fundamental part of the physical exercises and activities to be
carried out. Finally, the third “return to calm” part, where some stretching exercises are proposed, so
that participants gradually recover from the positive effects of the PA session and reflect on it.
Physical Activity Programs
for Older People:
Methodological Approach and
Practical Implications
Gonçalo Dias
Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Rui Sousa Mendes
Coimbra School of Education, Polytechnic
Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Rodrigo Mendes
University of Coimbra, Portugal
Cristiana Lameira
Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Portugal
Luis Pedro Ribeiro
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6967-0534
University of Algarve, Portugal
83
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
INTRODUCTION
Indeed, a proportion of older people (≥65 years) do not currently meet global physical activity recommendations.
This is a “troublesome” finding, given that individuals with a disability who regularly engage
in physical activity derive health benefits (see Debra Rose, 2017, in foreword Dias & Couceiro, 2017).
So, changes in sedentary patterns - even among those older than 65 - can reduce functional disability
life (cf. Dias & Couceiro, 2017 and Dias, 2022).
Given the above, to provide a physical activity program for older people, capable of offering lasting
psychomotor benefits, it is necessary to prescribe exercises directed to their real needs. Moreover,
to improve the quality of life of ageing people, it is important to apply an appropriate physical activity
methodology in terms of intensity, volume, frequency, and progression, minimizing the physiological
aspects that may be affected, such as cardiorespiratory function, among others (Radaelli et al., 2023).
Thus, we have no doubts that a physical activity program for older people will have to be extremely
motivating, pedagogical, playful, and very well organized from a technical point of view. Only in this
way, gradually, will we be able to win over people who have limitations resulting from an ageing body,
something that, per se, is already a great physical and psychological limitation and barrier.
This chapter’s main objective is to present a physical activity program for older people, which can
be carried out with very simple materials and accessible to any elderly person, being structured in three
distinct phases. The first phase of this chapter encompasses joint and organic mobilization, with the
objective of: i) adapting the body to physical activity; ii) improving general endurance and cardiovascular
capacity; iii) optimizing flexibility, balance, and motor coordination, and iv) prevent the onset of
joint and muscle injuries. The second phase: includes the fundamental part of the physical exercises
and activities to be carried out. Finally, the third phase: includes the “return to calm” part, where some
stretching exercises are proposed, so that participants gradually recover from the positive effects of the
physical activity session and reflect on it.
Considering the scarcity of studies and the known specialized literature on this matter, we substantiate
our program in the references that embody the present chapter, mainly the works that emerge from
the Portuguese authors - Gonçalo Dias and Rui Mendes, with manifest notoriety and publications internationally.
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY FOR OLDER PEOPLE
Physical activity is relevant for older people, especially in the treatment of vascular diseases, diabetes,
and hypertension, among other pathologies (Dias & Mendes, 2013, 2014, 2015).
Thus, a physical activity program for older people can include the following recommendations (Dias,
Felício, & Mendes, 2015; Dias, Mendes, & Vasconcelos, 2016; Dias & Couceiro, 2017; Dias, Mendes,
& Almeida 2017; Santos-Rocha, Francisco, Ribeiro & Lemos, 2023):
1. Exercise intensity should be low/moderate;
2. Physical exercise should not be applied if the elderly person manifests exhaustion and/or pain;
3. It is not recommended to exceed the maximum range of motion;
4. Fast and sudden exercises should be avoided;
5. The recreational component (e.g., games, songs, and traditional dances) can complement the session;
84
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
6. Requesting the anaerobic system is not recommended, giving priority to work involving the aerobic
pathways;
7. The use of medication must be cautious.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
PROGRAM FOR OLDER PEOPLE
A physical activity program for older people implies knowing the limitations inherent to age and psychomotor
needs (Dias & Couceiro, 2017; Santos, Francisco, Ribeiro & Lemos, 2023). On this basis, we
present the methodology and application of this program, which can be adapted to the elderly, depending
on their morphological and functional characteristics (cf. Table 1).
PHASE I - Joint and Organic Mobilization
Objectives of joint and organic mobilization (Table 2):
1. Adapt the organism to the performance of physical activity;
2. Decrease the risk of muscular injuries.
Elderly people who can walk and are in good health, especially in terms of cardiorespiratory function
and balance, can perform these and the following exercises in a standing position.
Table 1. Review and proposal adapted from Dias, Mendes, and Serra e Silva (2014); Dias, Mendes,
Serra e Silva and Braquinho (2015); Dias, Mendes, and Mendes (2015) and Dias and Couceiro (2017)
1. Structure 2. Frequency 3. Duration
Generally, the structure of the physical activity
session includes three distinct phases:
1. Initial part: joint and organic mobilization;
2. Fundamental part: learning and/or
performance of physical exercises;
3. Final part: return to calm.
On average, depending on the clinical
history of each person and their health
condition, the frequency of sessions can be 2
to 3 times a week, covering a 24 to 48 hours
break, for rest and physical recovery.
On average, depending on the clinical
history of each elderly person, the
duration of sessions can vary between
40 to 60 minutes of physical activity.
4. Intensity 5. Repetitions per exercise 6. Technical indications
The duration of physical activity sessions
can vary between 40 to 60 minutes. In this
case, we propose that the physical activity is
predominantly aerobic and of low intensity or
moderate intensity, where the proposed exercises
are between 60% and 70% of the maximum
heart rate, depending on the clinical history and
health condition.
This situation must be individualized and
adapted to the morphological and functional
characteristics of each person, depending also on
their abilities.
Depending on the clinical history of each
person and health condition, each exercise
should not exceed 10 repetitions, respecting
a time of 2 to 3 minutes, for recovery
between series, of the same movement.
At the beginning of the session,
depending on the clinical history of
each person and health condition, it is
recommended to perform flexibility
exercises, which prevent injuries to
the joints, tendons, ligaments, and
muscles (Dias & Mendes, 2015).
At the end of the session, depending
on the clinical history of each person
and health condition, we suggest
stretching, lasting 15 to 20 seconds
per exercise.
85
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 2(a). Exercises (1 to 7) for joint and organic mobilization – Phase I
86
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 2(b).87
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 2(c).Technical
note: As it is a very sensitive area of the body, which can cause serious injuries, we chose not to work on the cervical area.
88
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
PHASE II - physical exercises - fundamental part
Objective of the fundamental part of the session (Table 3):
1. Develop specific and varied exercises that develop the psychomotor and cardiorespiratory capacities
of the elderly.
PHASE III - Return to Calm
Objectives of the return to calm (Table 5):
2. Reduce muscle and joint tension involved in physical activity;
3. Provide a moment of reflection on the work developed in the session.
CONCLUSION
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
A physical activity program for older people must consider the intensity of the exercises, avoiding sudden
movements that jeopardize their physical integrity.
Physical activity can include a playful component, namely: games, songs, and traditional dances,
among other methodologies, previously described.
A physical activity program for older people implies knowing the limitations inherent to age and
individual changes that must be monitored by health professionals (e.g., doctors, nurses, psychologists,
physical education teachers, and physiotherapists, among others).
The implementation of this program depends on the psychomotor condition of each elderly person
and the prescribed medical indications, and it can be complemented with other proposals (e.g., Yoga,
Pedestrian orienteering, Hydro gymnastics and Cycling tourism, among others).
Finally, a physical activity program for older people will have to be extremely motivating, pedagogical,
playful, and very well organized from a technical point of view.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. A physical activity program for older people must respect the real psychomotor needs of older
people.
2. The intensity, volume, frequency, and progression of physical exercises must be adapted to the
psychomotor characteristics of each elderly person.
3. The blood pressure of the elderly should be monitored daily, preferably by health professionals.
4. We propose strict control of food, especially in terms of salt consumption.
5. Finally, we recommend a battery of tests to assess the results achieved (e.g., Fullerton Functional
Fitness Test (FFT) battery). These recommendations are transversal to people with cognitive decline.
89
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(a). Exercises for the upper limbs and trunk (1 to 20) - Fundamental Part - Phase II
90
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(b).91
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(c).92
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(d).93
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(e).94
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(f).95
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 3(g).96
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 4 (a). Exercises for the lower limbs (1 to 9) - Fundamental Part – Phase II
97
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 4 (b).98
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 4 (c).Pedagogical
note: Each exercise should not exceed 10 repetitions per body segment, respecting a time of 2 to 3 minutes for recovery
between sets of the same movement (Dias & Couceiro, 2017).
99
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 5(a). Exercises for Stretching (1 to 7) - Return to Calm – Phase III
100
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Table 5(b).101
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Final Observations
1. There is no conflict of interest between authors.
2. The images contemplated in this book were authorized by the authors that integrate it, namely:
Rodrigo Mendes and Cristiana Lameira, who served as a model for the technical execution of the
proposed exercises.
REFERENCES
Dias, G., & Couceiro, M. S. (2017a). Active Ageing and Physical Activity: Guidelines, Functional
Exercises and Recommendations. Springer International Publishing. , doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6
Dias, G., & Couceiro, M. S. (2017). Activity Programmes for the Elderly. Springer International Publishing.,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6_3
Table 5(c).Pedagogical
note: As shown in Figure 7, elderly people who can walk can perform the stretches in a standing position. People who do not
have the ambulatory capacity, alternatively, in a sitting position, with their hands resting on the top of the chair, can raise both upper limbs
and both feet, simultaneously, until the joint amplitude allows it, performing extension of the same, for 10 to 15 seconds.
102
Physical Activity Programs for Older People
﻿
Dias, G.; & Mendes, R. (2013). Actividade física para a terceira idade. Edição: Escola Superior de
Educação de Coimbra.
Dias, G.; & Mendes, R., & Serra e Silva (2014). Envelhecimento activo e actividade física. Edição:
Escola Superior de Educação de Coimbra.
Dias, G., Mendes, R., Serra e Silva, P., & Braquinho, A. (2015). Envelhecimento Activo: aplicações
práticas. In Envelhecimento Activo e Actividade Física, 103-103. Coimbra, Portugal: ESE.IPC.
Dias, G., Mendes, P. C., & Mendes, R. (2015). Gerontomotricidade e psicomotricidade. In Gerontomotricidade:
actividades lúdicas e pedagógicas para o corpo envelhecido, 1-27. Coimbra, Portugal: ESEC
Dias, G., Mendes, R., & Vasconcelos, O. (2016). Jogos Tradicionais Portugueses – abordagem pedagógica
e aplicações práticas. In Jogos e Brinquedos Populares: Tradição, Património e Legado (pp. 15–22).
Escola Superior de Educação de Coimbra.
Dias, G., Couceiro, M. S., Serra e Silva, P., Castro, M., Branquinho, A., Mendes, R., & Carvalho,
I. (2017). Introduction: New Paradigms of Active Ageing. In Active Ageing and Physical Activity
Guidelines, Functional Exercises and Recommendations (pp. 1–19). Springer International Publishing.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6_1
Dias, G., Mendes, P. C., & Almeida, M. (2017). Physical Activity Benefits in Active Ageing. In Active
Ageing and Physical Activity: Guidelines, Functional Exercises and Recommendations (pp. 21–34).
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6_2
Dias, G., Felício, J., & Mendes, R. (2015). Musicoterapia e envelhecimento activo. In Gerontomotricidade:
actividades lúdicas e pedagógicas para o corpo envelhecido (pp. 29–46). ESEC.
Dias, G., Mendes, P. C., & Mendes, R. (2015). Gerontomotricidade e psicomotricidade. In Gerontomotricidade:
actividades lúdicas e pedagógicas para o corpo envelhecido (pp. 1–27). ESEC.
Dias, G. (2022). Active or Healthy Ageing: “A Wonderful Journey between Body, Cognition and Emotion.
European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education, 12(6), 534–535. doi:10.3390/
ejihpe12060039 PMID:35735460
Radaelli, R., Trajano, G. S., Freitas, S. R., Izquierdo, M., Cadore, E. L., & Pinto, R. S. (2023). Power
Training Prescription in Older Individuals: Is It Safe and Effective to Promote Neuromuscular Functional
Improvements? Sports Medicine (Auckland, N.Z.), 53(3), 569–576. doi:10.100740279-022-01758-0
PMID:36036337
Santos-Rocha, R., Francisco, R., Ribeiro, R., & Campos, F. (2023) Importância e benefícios do exercício
físico na população idosa. In F. Campos & E. Ângelo (Eds.) Envelhecimento e Atividade Física - Guia
para Profissionais. Lidel.
103
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 7
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch007
ABSTRACT
Considering the age-related physiological and pathological changes, it´s relevant to analyze the scientific
production regarding the contributions of equine-assisted therapy (EAT) to the health of elderly
people (EP). This scoping review followed the JBI methodology, according to the PCC method. EAT has
had benefits in healthy EP: increasing trunk neuromuscular activation, balance, flexibility, agility, and
coordination. In Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, it’s associated with an improvement in predictive fall risk
factors. It´s also associated with reduced spasticity and improved mental well-being in EP with spinal
cord injury. In arthritis, a decrease the intensity and frequency of pain and increase of range of motion.
Regarding mental health, EAT increases psychological stability, social stimulation, relaxation, and the
evocation of positive memories. In post-traumatic stress disorder, it can increase a sense of self-security.
Concomitantly, it may be associated with an improvement of EP memory. The integration of EAT into
therapeutic plans for EP should be considered by health professionals.
Contributions of Equine-
Assisted Therapy to the
Health of the Elderly:
A Scoping Review
Tânia Martins Gonçalves
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8302-948X
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria da Conceição Farinha
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Cristina Marques-Vieira
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4409-7911
Nursing School, Universidade Católica
Portuguesa, Portugal
Maria Augusta Ferreira
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria Adelaide Paiva
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria do Céu Neves
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
104
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
INTRODUCTION
Equine-assisted therapy uses the movement of a horse to elicit righting and postural balance. It improves
physiological aspects, namely balance, strength, coordination, muscle tone, joint range of movement,
weight-bearing, body posture, and gait. It also influences psychological aspects, including self-confidence,
self-esteem, motivation, and spatial awareness. Subsequently, it has been used as an effective intervention
to help restore normal function in patients with various disease conditions (Beinotti et al., 2010).
Given the above, equine-assisted therapy has been identified and increasingly used as a complementary
strategy to conventional therapeutic therapies. Nevertheless, the literature essentially shows the benefits
for children and young people with physical and mental disabilities. Therefore, considering the physiological
and pathological changes resulting from aging, it becomes pertinent to identify the contributions
of this intervention to the health of the elderly which, if verified, could enhance the integration of this
therapy in therapeutic plans defined by health professionals.
Advancing age is associated with physiological changes that result in decreased muscle strength.
Muscle function variables such as strength and balance are important determinants for the maintenance
and development of functional abilities. However, if physical exercise is practiced frequently and systematically,
it can improve the muscular performance and the functional abilities of the elderly. A study
carried out by Alanee et al. (2009) identified a tendency toward an association between horseback riding
and stress incontinence. Another study by Kubota et al. (2006) concluded that mechanical horseback
riding enhances insulin-induced glucose uptake in elder diabetic patients.
In this context, equine-assisted therapy uses rhythmic and three-dimensional oscillations of horses
to trigger neuromuscular responses. Conclusively, as this type of physical activity requires the use of
the entire body, it can have important contributions to the health of the elderly (Janura, et al., 2009).
It was decided to prepare a scoping review, guided by the methodology proposed by the Joanna Briggs
Institute (JBI) (Peters et al., 2020), to systematically explore and map the evidence available in the literature
on the contributions of equine-assisted therapy in the health of the elderly. Such data are relevant
since they can support the analysis, reflection, and investigation of the role of nurses in this context.
More specifically, this review aims to answer the question: What are the contributions of horse-assisted
therapy to the health of the elderly?
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW METHOD
According to the recommendations of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) for conducting a scoping review
(Peters et al., 2020), the PCC strategy (participants, concept, and context) was used with the following
inclusion criteria:
105
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
Inclusion Criteria
Search Strategy
The research strategy included studies written in English, French, Spanish, and Portuguese, published in
the last 10 years, more specifically between September 2012 and September 2022. Data were collected
using the CINAHL Plus with Full-Text databases, and MEDLINE with Full Text, from the EBSCOhost
platform.
Initially, an initial search was carried out in the databases included to analyze and group the words
contained in the text of the titles and abstracts most used in the articles. In a second moment, a search
was carried out in these same databases using the identified keywords and indexing terms. Subsequently,
the bibliographic references of the articles and studies identified were analyzed to search for and include
additional studies.
The search results were exported to the Mendeley ® reference management software and duplicate
articles were removed. Then, a critical and reflective reading of the titles and abstracts of the researched
articles was carried out to evaluate their relevance to the review. A careful analysis of the articles that
meet the inclusion criteria, through full reading, was performed to extract the evidence related to the
contributions of equine-assisted therapy on the health of the elderly. To organize the analysis, phrases,
and words that corresponded to elements of interest related to models of professional nursing practice
were identified and transcribed.
The data extraction includes a logical and descriptive summary of the results that must be in line with
the objectives and questions of the scoping review (Peters et al., 2020). To systematize the information
in the articles, the extracted data were descriptively compiled by two independent reviewers, using an
instrument previously prepared by the authors.
At all stages, the analysis of the full text of the articles was carried out by two reviewers independently,
to verify the satisfaction of the defined inclusion criteria. In cases where discrepancies were found, a
third reviewer was consulted for a final decision.
Table 1. Inclusion criteria
Participants Concept Context
Studies that include people over 65 years of
age (healthy or with a disease)
Studies that approach equine-assisted
therapy, including simulated horseback
riding
Studies that approach the contributions to
health
Study design
Quantitative, qualitative, mixed-method studies, and literature reviews.
Publication Language
Studies published in Portuguese, Spanish, French or English.
Publication date
Studies published between 1 September 2012 and 30 September 2022
106
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
PRESENTATION AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
To enable a mapping of the data extracted from the articles included in the review, the results of a scoping
review must be presented in the form of graphs, figures, and/or tables (Peters et al., 2020).
In the search, 154 articles were identified, of which 24 were excluded because they were duplicates.
Of the remaining 130 articles, 101 were excluded after analyzing the title and abstract. Subsequently,
of the remaining 29 articles, 15 were excluded after reading the full text for not meeting the inclusion
criteria. Conclusively, 14 studies present the contributions of equine-assisted therapy to the health of
the elderly (Figure 1).
Figure 1. PRISMA Flowchart (adapted): Study selection process
107
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
The 14 included studies are from different regions of the globe and were published between 2013
and 2020. Of these, one is European, five are Asian, four are from North America and four are from
South America.
Regarding methodology, 13 resort to quantitative methods and one uses mixed methods.
The characteristics of the included studies are presented in table 2.
Table 2 (a). Description of the included studies
Authors Title Year Country Methodology Participants
Sung et al.
(2013)
“A hippotherapy simulator is
effective to shift weight bearing
toward the affected side during
gait in patients with stroke”
2013 South Korea
Quantitative
(randomized controlled
trial)
20 participants
(hemiplegic patients
diagnosed with stroke
White-Lewis et
al. (2019)
“An equine-assisted therapy
intervention to improve pain,
range of motion, and quality of
life in adults and older adults with
arthritis: A randomized controlled
trial”
2019 United States
of America
Quantitative
(randomized controlled
trial)
20 participants with
arthritis recruited from
rheumatology clinics
Araujo et al.
(2019)
“An Exploration of Equine-
Assisted Therapy to Improve
Balance, Functional Capacity, and
Cognition in Older Adults with
Alzheimer Disease”
2019 Brazil
Quantitative
(quasiexperimental
study)
9 participants with a
diagnosis of Alzheimer
disease
Araujo et al.
(2013)
“Effects of hippotherapy on
mobility, strength, and balance in
elderly”
2019 Brazil
Quantitative
(randomized controlled
trial)
28 healthy elderly
Cho (2017)
“Effects of horseback riding
exercise on the relative alpha
power spectrum in the elderly”
2017 Republic of
Korea Quantitative 31 healthy elderly
Kim et al. (2015)
“Effects of horseback riding
exercise therapy on background
electroencephalograms of elderly
people”
2015 Republic of
Korea Quantitative 20 elderly
Cho et al. (2015)
“Effects of horseback riding
exercise therapy on hormone
levels in elderly persons”
2015 Republic of
Korea Quantitative 20 elderly
Bunketorp-Kall
et al. (2019)
“Effects of horse-riding therapy
and rhythm and music-based
therapy on functional mobility in
late phase after stroke”
2019 Sweden
Quantitative
(randomized controlled
trial)
123 participants who
had a stroke at least 10
months ago, but no more
than 5 years ago.
Goudy et al.
(2019)
“Effects of Simulated Horseback
Riding on Balance, Postural Sway,
and Quality of Life in Older
Adults With Parkinson’s Disease”
2019 United States
of America Quantitative
12 participants with
diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease
108
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
The contributions of equine-assisted therapy to the health of the elderly are listed in table 3.
Table 2(b).Authors
Title Year Country Methodology Participants
Mello et al.
(2020)
“Electromyographic analysis of
stomatognathic muscles in elderly
after hippotherapy”
2020 Brazil Quantitative 17 healthy elderly
Kim et al. (2018)
“Equine Exercise in Younger and
Older Adults: Simulated Versus
Real Horseback Riding”
2018 Republic of
Korea Quantitative 46 healthy elderly
Diniz et al.
(2020)
“Impact of hippotherapy for
balance improvement and
flexibility in elderly people”
2020 Brazil
Quantitative
(randomized and doubleblind
study)
30 healthy elderly
Lee et al. (2020)
“Older Adults’ Perceived Benefits
of Equine-Assisted Psychotherapy:
Implications for Social Work”
2020 United States
of America Mixed design
22 participants with
functional limitations
and/or cognitive
impairment
Steele et al.
(2018)
“TRR’s Warrior Camp: An
Intensive Treatment Program
for Combat Trauma in Active
Military and Veterans of All
Eras”
2018 United States
of America Quantitative
85 participants (all
participants served in
the military and 91.7%
reported having been
deployed to a combat
zone)
Table 3(a). Answers to the review’s research question per study
Study Number of sessions and duration Contributions of equine-assisted therapy on
the health of the elderly
Sung et al. (2013)
The control group received conventional rehabilitation for
60 minutes a day, 5 times a week for 4 weeks, while the
experimental group received conventional rehabilitation for
45 minutes a day followed using a hippotherapy simulator
for 15 minutes a day, 5 times a week for 4 weeks.
A hippotherapy simulator influences symmetric
body weight bearing during gait in patients
with stroke. This intervention stimulates trunk
muscles from sit-to-stand to stand, or from
stand-to-walk. Therefore, it improves the shift of
body weight bearing on gait.
White-Lewis et al.
(2019)
Participants spent one hour each week for six weeks
learning to ride a horse, starting with basics like walking
around the arena and progressing to more complex tasks
such as weaving through cones. Stretching exercises were
also done as a warm-up and human-animal bonding time
was provided after riding.
Horse Assisted Therapy decreases pain and
improves the range of motion and quality of life
for adults and older adults with arthritis.
109
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
Table 3(b).Study
Number of sessions and duration Contributions of equine-assisted therapy on
the health of the elderly
Araujo et al. (2019)
Equine-assisted therapy consisted of 30-minute sessions
over ten weeks (20 sessions). During the intervention,
physical and cognitive exercises were increased in intensity
every two weeks. Physical exercises varied gait, surface,
terrain, and direction to increase the intensity and sensory/
balanced inputs. Cognitive exercises included memorizing
and saying names, colors, and objects, as well as controlling
the horse’s reins both inside and outside.
The equine-assisted therapy is associated with
an improvement in balance and functional
capacity in older adults with Alzheimer’s
disease.
Araujo et al. (2013)
Hippotherapy was done for 8 weeks, with two 30-minute
sessions per week, totaling 16 sessions. The intervention
began with familiarization exercises for the practitioner
to adapt to the horse’s movements, with an emphasis on
postural awareness. This progressed to different riding
positions, flexion, and abduction, with the difficulty
increasing to include frontal riding on a saddle in uneven
terrain with trunk rotation. Exercises were finished with
five minutes of stretching while standing on the horse. Each
individual used the same animal and guide throughout the
training sessions.
A horse-assisted therapy intervention, aimed
at healthy elderly people, resulted in an
improvement in the lower limb strength and
balance in the elderly.
Cho (2017) The equine-assisted therapy was conducted twice a week for
12 weeks, lasting 25 minutes each session.
The effect of horse-assisted therapy sessions
on relative alpha power (an indicator of mental
health in a stable mental state) in healthy elderly
was analysed. It was concluded that horseback
riding and mechanical horseback riding exercise
has a positive effect on psychological stability
in the elderly.
Kim et al. (2015) Equine-assisted therapy was performed for 15 minutes, 3
times per week, over 8 weeks.
The alpha power index increased significantly
after horseback riding exercise.
Cho et al. (2015)
Equine-assisted therapy was performed 3 times per week
for 15 minutes over 8 weeks. The study was performed on
horses at the slowest walking speed (110 m/min) with an
instructor leading the horse by the bridle and an assistant
supporting the rider’s movement to prevent falls.
Horseback riding exercise is effective for
improving the levels of serotonin and cortisol.
Bunketorp-Kall et al.
(2019)
Equine-assisted therapy involved two weekly sessions over
a 12-week period.
The equine-assisted therapy is associated to be
an improvement in gait and functional mobility
in late-phase stroke survivors.
110
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
Table 3(c).Study
Number of sessions and duration Contributions of equine-assisted therapy on the
health of the elderly
Goudy et al. (2019)
Participants exercised twice a week on a simulator for 60 minutes
per session over six weeks. Participants were asked to adopt an erect
posture and exercise at a moderate intensity (5 or 6 on the Borg’s
modified rate of perceived exertion scale) while seated on the saddle
of the simulator.
The simulated horseback riding improves the balance
and the cognitive impairment em elderly com
Parkinson.
Mello et al. (2020)
Equine-assisted therapy was done with the horse in step for 30
minutes to evaluate the effect of the three-dimensional movement
provided by the horse. No other activities were done during the
session.
The equine-assisted therapy promotes a reduction in
the myoelectric activity of the masticatory muscles of
the elderly.
Kim et al. (2018)
Three expert riders evaluated the core muscle activation of three
different gait speeds (walk 1⁄4 80 m/minute, slow trot 1⁄4 135
m/minute, and fast trot 1⁄4 159m/minute) using a FORTIS-102
simulator. The results showed similarity between HR and HRS. The
experiment was performed in 15-minute blocks with 8-minute rests
between each one.
Simulated riding can be an effective alternative to real
riding to increase the muscle activation of the thigh
and trunk and improve postural control and balance, as
there are no significant changes in this positive effect
in both methods.
Diniz et al. (2020)
Participants were involved in at least two activities, such as hydro
gymnastics, swimming, dancing, and bodybuilding, twice a
week, but only hippotherapy was used in place of conventional
physiotherapy. Ten 30-min hippotherapy sessions were conducted
once a week. The person was on the saddle with their feet in
the stirrups during the first 15 min and with feet off the stirrups
during the last 15 min. No other activities were permitted when the
elderly person was on the horse. This was the initial contact with
hippotherapy for the Hippotherapy Group.
The equine-assisted therapy is associated to an
improvement of functional mobility, dynamic balance,
and flexibility in elderly people.
Lee et al. (2020)
Equine-assisted intervention without horseback riding. The mental
health professionals and equine specialists provided a nonriding
equine-assisted psychotherapy intervention with four sessions:
grooming, horse care, exercise, and lunch time conversations. The
activities lasted 20–30 min each, including breaks, over six weeks.
During lunch time, the facilitators encouraged participants to
reminisce about horses and interactions with animals from earlier
life stages. Mental health professionals and equine specialists work
together to ensure that clients and horses are both emotionally and
physically safe during their interactions, monitoring emotions and
nonverbal communication.
The equine-assisted therapy promotes the social
interaction in a group setting (positive influences from
their peers), the relaxation in the outdoor environment
and evoking positive memories.
Table 3(d).Study
Number of sessions and duration Contributions of equine-assisted therapy on
the health of the elderly
Steele et al. (2018)
Participants in this treatment program stayed on site at
an equine center for a week of therapy and experiential
activities. Equine-assisted intervention was a non-riding
psychotherapeutic approach that used horses and a mental
health professional to help clients with trauma and moral
injury by using the horses’ behaviour as a metaphor. It
helps clients improve problem solving, communication,
attachment, trust, self-control, setting boundaries, and
calming their nervous system. This 7-day intensive
treatment combines eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing therapy, equine-assisted psychotherapy, yoga,
and narrative writing to help individuals in a supportive
community setting.
An intensive intervention that combined
horse-assisted therapy, reprocessing therapy,
yoga, and narrative writing in the context of the
community, was reflected in an improvement
in post-traumatic stress disorder, depression,
attachment problems, moral injury, and reduced
dissociative experiences.
111
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
Strokes often have implications in motor, sensory, and cognitive function. These implications can
permanently condition self-care; therefore, health professionals need to implement strategies that improve
balance, strength, coordination, muscle tone, range of joint movement, weight-bearing, body posture,
and gait in patients with neurological problems. In this sense, a study carried out in South Korea sought
to analyze the contribution of a hippotherapy simulator in symmetrical weight bearing in patients with
stroke. The results showed that the activation of the erector spinae and the gait parameters (load response,
single support, total double support, and pre-swing) in the experimental group was significantly increased
compared to the control group (Sung et al., 2013).
Still regarding people with stroke, Bunketorp-Kall et al. (2019) searched to analyze if equine therapy
and therapy based on rhythm and music influence functional mobility in the late phase after stroke. The
intervention included sessions twice a week for 12 weeks. The results point to a significant improvement
in gait and functional performance in the late phase after stroke. These results partially last for six
months. Improving mobility is of great importance for achieving autonomy, as well as for reintegration
into the community of people with stroke (Bunketorp-Kall et al., 2019).
Along with what happens with stroke, arthritis can also condition the quality of life of the elderly due
to pain, stiffness, and decreased function. At this level, an intervention that included 30-minute sessions
of horse-assisted therapy in people with arthritis resulted in a statistically significant improvement in
back pain and range of motion for the back, hips, and shoulder six weeks after starting the intervention,
probably due to the tri-rotational movement that horse-assisted therapy promotes. There was also a significant
improvement in the quality-of-life aspects: affect and upper limbs (White-Lewis et al., 2019).
In the elderly, improvements in motor function (gait, lower limb function, and balance) may be associated
with improvements in cognition (global cognition, executive function, memory, and information
processing speed). In this sense, a study carried out in Brazil included an intervention of horse-assisted
therapy in people with Alzheimer’s disease. This study intervention lasted 10 weeks and consisted of
30-minute sessions twice a week, totalizing 20 sessions. During the intervention, there was a progressive
increase in the intensity of physical exercise (the trot was used to increase intense sensory and balance
inputs) and cognitive exercise (memorizing and saying the name of the horse, therapists, colors,
and objects during the sessions). At the end of the intervention, there were significant improvements
in balance and functional capacity. Lower limb muscle weakness is a predictor of falls, however, this
intervention significantly increased participants’ lower limb strength and anterior-posterior balance.
Alzheimer’s disease leads to a gradual decline in cognition and limits the ability to perform dual-task
activities, which is why the study intervention included simultaneous combinations of cognitive and
physical activities. In this sense, cognitive function was evaluated, and it was verified that it did not
decrease (Araujo et al., 2019).
Another study, carried out by the same authors, included a horse-assisted therapy intervention for
healthy elderly. This study intervention lasted 8 weeks and consisted of 30-minute sessions twice a week,
totalizing 16 sessions. The intervention performed was effective in the improvement of functional mobility
and muscle strength of the lower limbs (Araujo et al., 2013). In agreement with these results, also
a study carried out by Diniz et al. (2020) demonstrated that horse-assisted therapy improves functional
mobility, dynamic balance, and flexibility in elderly people.
Aging can affect the stomatognathic system, which can trigger postural imbalances. Nevertheless,
horse-assisted therapy can promote cervical, postural, and balance control in the elderly. A study carried
out by Mello et al. (2020) aimed to evaluate the effect of horse-assisted therapy in the center of gravity
of the practitioner and their benefits on controlling stress by evaluating the patterns of myoelectric activ112
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
ity that affect the masticatory muscles through electromyography. The results show that horse-assisted
therapy promotes a reduction in the myoelectric activity of the masticatory muscles of the elderly. The
study also approaches that with each step that the horse gives, the center of gravity of the practitioner is
dislocated from its midline, causing an imbalance and then causing restoration of the center of gravity.
So, the vestibular system is constantly triggered. Slow vestibular stimulation benefits the balance and
relaxation of muscle tone throughout the body.
A study performed by Kim et al. (2015) also sought to analyze the effects of horseback riding exercise
therapy on background electroencephalograms of elderly people. The results of this study are in line with
the results of the previously mentioned study, also verifying that the relative faster alpha power index
was active in all domains of the horseback riding exercise group but was suppressed in all domains of the
control group. These same authors (Cho et al., 2015) sought to analyze the effects of horseback riding
exercise therapy on hormone levels in elderly persons, having found that cortisol and serotonin levels
increased significantly in the group submitted to horseback-assisted therapy in relation to the group of
control, suggesting that horseback riding exercise is effective for improving the levels of these hormones.
Regarding Parkinson’s patients, physical exercise may be used to prevent and mitigate the symptoms.
A study carried out by Goudy et al. (2019) aimed to determine changes in balance, postural sway,
and quality of life in people with Parkinson’s. The intervention consisted of using a horseback-riding
simulator to carry out 60-minute sessions twice a week for six weeks. It was concluded that simulated
horseback riding is associated with an improvement in balance and cognitive impairment in elderly
people with Parkinson’s.
Once the use of simulated horseback riding was approached, a study carried out by Kim et al. (2018)
sought to compare muscle activation patterns in real and simulated horseback riding exercises, through
surface electromyography recordings of the erector spinae, rectus abdominis, internal oblique abdominis,
and rectus femoris muscles. The results indicate that simulated riding can be an effective alternative
to real riding to increase the muscle activation of the thigh and trunk and improve postural control and
balance because there are no significant changes between methods.
In the elderly population, strategies that promote physiological and cognitive function must be accompanied
by strategies that promote social functioning. In this sense, the results of a study carried out
by Lee et al. (2020) show that horse-assisted therapy an equine-assisted intervention without horseback
riding stimulates social interaction in a group setting (positive influences from their peers), the relaxation
in the outdoor environment and evoking positive memories.
Regarding people with post-traumatic stress disorder recovery is possible when proper treatment is
implemented. For this reason, a study carried out by Steele et al. (2018). aimed at implementing The
Trauma and Resiliency Resources, Inc.’s Warrior Camp. Program. This program is designed to deal
with the effects of combat trauma on military service members and veterans. It consists of an intensive
7-day treatment that incorporates reprocessing therapy, equine-assisted psychotherapy, yoga, and narrative
writing in a community context. The combination of these strategies significantly contributed to
an improvement in post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, attachment problems, moral injury, and
reduced dissociative experiences.
113
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
CONCLUSION
The objective of this scoping review was to explore and map the available scientific evidence on the
contributions of equine-assisted therapy to the health of the elderly. The limitation of this review is the
exclusion of articles in other languages than Portuguese, Spanish, English, or French. Extensive research
in other databases could be important in identifying relevant results.
Eleven studies carried out in various regions of the world were identified, with no Portuguese study
identified.
The analysis of the articles included in the study identified that equine-assisted therapy has had
benefits in healthy elderly people, namely in increasing trunk neuromuscular activation (electromyography
data), balance, flexibility, agility, coordination, and health-related quality of life. In people with
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease, it is associated with a significant improvement in predictive fall
risk factors, namely trunk balance, lower extremity muscle strength, cognitive ability, and as a result,
functional capacity. It is also associated with reduced spasticity and improved mental well-being in
elderly people with spinal cord injury and improved balance. In arthritis situations, it is associated with
a decrease in the intensity and frequency of pain and increase of range of motion. Regarding elderly
mental health, it translates into increased psychological stability (electroencephalogram data), social
stimulation in a group environment, relaxation, and the evocation of positive memories. In people with
post-traumatic stress disorder, if combined with other strategies (yoga, narrative writing, reprocessing
therapy) it can increase a sense of self-security. Concomitantly, when combined with other strategies,
such as music therapy, it may be associated with an improvement in the elderly’s memory. The use of
riding simulators as an alternative to the use of horses is also associated with improved balance, muscle
activation, and motivation.
Evidence shows that the use of therapy with horses or riding simulators is a strategy that promotes
the physical and mental well-being of the elderly, which benefits not only healthy elderly people but also
people with neuromuscular and neurosensory disorders. Subsequently, their integration into therapeutic
plans for the elderly should be considered by health professionals.
REFERENCES
Alanee, S., Heiner, J., Liu, N., & Monga, M. (2009). Horseback riding: Impact on sexual dysfunction
and lower urinary tract symptoms in men and women. Urology, 73(1), 109–114. doi:10.1016/j.urology.
2008.07.058 PMID:18950839
Araujo, T., Martins, W. R., Freitas, M. P., Camargos, E., Mota, J., & Safons, M. P. (2019). An Exploration
of Equine-Assisted Therapy to Improve Balance, Functional Capacity, and Cognition in Older
Adults With Alzheimer Disease. Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy, 42(3), E155–E160. doi:10.1519/
JPT.0000000000000167 PMID:29630005
Araújo, T. B., de Oliveira, R. J., Martins, W. R., de Moura Pereira, M., Copetti, F., & Safons, M. P.
(2013). Effects of hippotherapy on mobility, strength and balance in elderly. Archives of Gerontology
and Geriatrics, 56(3), 478–481. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2012.12.007 PMID:23290005
114
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
Beinotti, F., Correia, N., Christofoletti, G., & Borges, G. (2010). Use of hippotherapy in gait training
for hemiparetic post-stroke. Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria, 68(6), 908–913. doi:10.1590/S0004-
282X2010000600015 PMID:21243251
Bunketorp-Käll, L., Pekna, M., Pekny, M., Blomstrand, C., & Nilsson, M. (2019). Effects of horseriding
therapy and rhythm and music-based therapy on functional mobility in late phase after stroke.
NeuroRehabilitation, 45(4), 483–492. doi:10.3233/NRE-192905 PMID:31868694
Cho, S.-H. (2017). Effects of horseback riding exercise on the relative alpha power spectrum in the elderly.
Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 70, 141–147. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2017.01.011 PMID:28135668
Cho, S.-H., Kim, J.-W., Kim, S.-R., & Cho, B.-J. (2015). Effects of horseback riding exercise therapy on
hormone levels in elderly persons. Journal of Physical Therapy Science, 27(7), 2271–2273. doi:10.1589/
jpts.27.2271 PMID:26311966
Diniz, L. H., de Mello, E. C., Ribeiro, M. F., Lage, J. B., Bevilacqua Júnior, D. E., Ferreira, A. A., Ferraz,
M. L., Rosa, R. C., Teixeira, V. P. A., & Espindula, A. P. (2020). Impact of hippotherapy for balance
improvement and flexibility in elderly people. Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies, 24(2),
92–97. doi:10.1016/j.jbmt.2019.10.002 PMID:32507159
Goudy, L. S., Rigby, B. R., Silliman-French, L., & Becker, K. A. (2019). Effects of Simulated Horseback
Riding on Balance, Postural Sway, and Quality of Life in Older Adults With Parkinson’s Disease. Adapted
Physical Activity Quarterly; APAQ, 36(4), 413–430. doi:10.1123/apaq.2019-0008 PMID:31323643
Janura, M., Peham, C., Dvorakova, T., & Elfmark, M. (2009). An assessment of the pressure distribution
exerted by a rider on the back of a horse during hippotherapy. Human Movement Science, 28(3),
387–393. doi:10.1016/j.humov.2009.04.001 PMID:19406498
Kim, M. J., Kim, T., Oh, S., & Yoon, B. (2018). Equine Exercise in Younger and Older Adults: Simulated Versus
Real Horseback Riding. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 125(1), 93–108. doi:10.1177/0031512517736463
PMID:29073822
Kim, S.-R., Cho, S.-H., Kim, J.-W., Lee, H.-C., Brienen, M., & Cho, B.-J. (2015). Effects of horseback
riding exercise therapy on background electroencephalograms of elderly people. Journal of Physical
Therapy Science, 27(7), 2373–2376. doi:10.1589/jpts.27.2373 PMID:26311985
Kubota, M., Nagasaki, M., Tokudome, M., Shinomiya, Y., Ozawa, T., & Sato, Y. (2006). Mechanical
horseback riding improves insulin sensitivity in elder diabetic patients. Diabetes Research and Clinical
Practice, 71(2), 124–130. doi:10.1016/j.diabres.2005.06.012 PMID:16105705
Lee, K., Dabelko-Schoeny, H., Jedlicka, H., & Burns, T. (2020). Older Adults’ Perceived Benefits of
Equine-Assisted Psychotherapy: Implications for Social Work. Research on Social Work Practice, 30(4),
399–407. doi:10.1177/1049731519890399
Mello, E. C., Regalo, S. C. H., Diniz, L. H., Lage, J. B., Ribeiro, M. F., Bevilacqua, D. E. Junior, Rosa, R.
C., Ferreira, A. A., Ferraz, M. L. F., & Teixeira, V. (2020). Electromyographic analysis of stomatognathic
muscles in elderly after hippotherapy. PLoS One, 15(8), e0238036. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0238036
PMID:32853244
115
Contributions of Equine-Assisted Therapy to the Health of the Elderly
﻿
Peters, M. D., Godfrey, C., McInerney, P., Munn, Z., Tricco, A. C., & Khalil, H. (2020.). Chapter 11:
Scoping reviews. In Aromataris, E. & Munn, Z. (Eds.), JBI manual for evidence synthesis. https://synthesismanual.
jbi.global. doi:10.46658/JBIMES-20-12
Steele, E., Wood, D. S., Usadi, E. J., Applegarth, D. M., & Usadi, J. (2018). TRR’s Warrior Camp: An
Intensive Treatment Program for Combat Trauma in Active Military and Veterans of All Eras. Military
Medicine, 183(suppl_1), 403–407. doi:10.1093/milmed/usx153 PMID:29635563
Sung, Y.-H., Kim, C.-J., Yu, B.-K., & Kim, K.-M. (2013). A hippotherapy simulator is effective to shift
weight bearing toward the affected side during gait in patients with stroke. NeuroRehabilitation, 33(3),
407–412. doi:10.3233/NRE-130971 PMID:23949070
White-Lewis, S., Johnson, R., Ye, S., & Russell, C. (2019). An equine-assisted therapy intervention to
improve pain, range of motion, and quality of life in adults and older adults with arthritis: A randomized
controlled trial. Applied Nursing Research, 49, 5–12. doi:10.1016/j.apnr.2019.07.002 PMID:31495419
116
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 8
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch008
ABSTRACT
Being able to theoretically underpin the gerontology of ageing is a fundamental part of designing and
constructing bespoke research and care interventions for the exploration of falls prevention in practice.
Within the context of home care and community-based settings, being able to integrate falls prevention
into the integrated care that older people receive, their ambulation, health and wellbeing, and subsequently
their longevity in senior years can be extended and sustained in terms of quality and satisfaction.
This chapter contextualizes and frames falls and fall injuries as a societal challenge by deconstructing
the characteristic physiological processes of senescence and identifying key areas for fundamental address
in the prevention of falls ‘in situ.’ The chapter focus is predominantly aligned to those processes of
natural senescence aligned with normal ageing processes, alongside those pathologies which constitute
abnormal pathological processes, which occur more often in older adults as a consequence of these
processes of senescence.
INTRODUCTION
With increasing numbers of older adults living beyond the age of 65 years, so too is there a corresponding
increasing number of falls in the home, which constitute the most significant number of injuries in
adults of this specific age group (Moreland, Kakara, & Henry, 2020). Statistical analysis reveals that the
risk of falls increases exponentially with age, which can lead to potentially long-term issues and challenges
with the maintenance of ambulatory wellbeing as a consequence of resultant physical disability or
impairment, and consequently contributes to poorer outcomes in quality and longevity of life (Tornero-
Quiñones et al, 2020). Fatalities arising as a consequence of falls in those aged over 65 years and can
be attributed to up to one third of all accidental deaths in this age group (Mielenz et al, 2020). Rates of
mortality such as these are largely preventable in relation to those necessitating long term care within
nursing home and residential care settings (Drake et al, 2021). It is the normal processes of senescence,
Ambulatory Wellbeing:
Perspectives on Senescence in Gerontology
Catherine Hayes
University of Sunderland, UK
117
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
which impact on the physiological decline of ageing adults (Katsuumi, 2018; Faragher, 2017). Being
able to accommodate and account for these within complex individual physical and social care provides a
sound rationale for the integration of falls prevention strategies in the overall health continuum for older
adults, where modifications can be made to prevent risk of future falls (Khong et al, 2017). Since once
an older adult has fallen once, they are statistically two thirds more likely to fall again over the next 12
months, this can be a significant means of avoiding elevated rates of morbidity and mortality in this age
group (Bartosch et al 2020; Gazibara et al, 2017). This chapter constitutes a theoretical contribution to
the gerontology of ageing, so that the target audience can potentially develop a comprehensive knowledge
and understanding of the physiological processes of senescence. For those professionals seeking to align
strategic interventions with what is practically achievable remains one of the greatest challenges in this
field of gerontology (Schapmire et al, 2018; Skinner, Andrews, & Cutchin, 2017). Encouraging active
and healthy processes of ageing not only benefits individual members of society, it has wider economic
implications for health services, which deal with the implications of normal physiological senescence
as greater numbers of older adults live into old age and, as a consequence of this, are more likely to live
with morbidities which impact on their ambulatory health and wellbeing (Alcañiz, & Solé-Auró, 2018).
Functional senescence is part of a normal process of physiological ageing. This encompasses the
gradual deterioration of the organs and systems of the body alongside a progressively decreasing capacity
for function by the body’s processes of homeostasis (He & Sharpless, 2017). In terms of finality, the
process of senescence leads to progressive dysfunction and eventual death. The fact that this is a normal
trajectory for the ageing body also provides an insight into how disease and ageing synergistically contribute
to the acceleration of death in older adults (Herranz & Gil, 2018). The publication of the World
Guidelines for Falls Prevention and Management for Older Adults: A Global Initiative (2022) has placed
falls in the elderly as a central focus for strategic address across contemporary societies. Providing an
understanding of the basic physiological knowledge within the context of the process of senescence
and disease, and their relevance to potential falls prevention initiatives is the overall aim of this chapter
INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF MULTI-MORBIDITY AND SENESCENCE
As part of the trajectory of chronological ageing, statistical evidence provides an insight into the correlation
between increasing age and increasing abnormal pathology. In this sense ageing is a natural
process of physiological decline characterised by processes of physical change (Tieland, Trouwburst, &
Clark, 2018). It is these processes of the ageing process which can be attributed to the often very serious
consequences of illness, which amongst their younger counterparts, may be perceived and experienced
as relatively minor. Comorbidities in ageing individuals are far more common in adults aged 65 years
and older and these directly impact on the development, prognosis and consequent management of illness
(van Onna & Boonen, 2016). Those systems such as the neurological, vascular, respiratory and
musculoskeletal systems demonstrate clear processes of degeneration with age, and as ageing progresses,
pathology is statistically far more likely to present as being symptomatically atypical, meaning prompt
assessment, diagnosis and management can be significantly delayed (Bisdorff et al., 2013). Depending
on the nature of these presenting conditions, some of which may be progressive or even metastatic, in
instances of cancer, this can have devastating consequences, which might otherwise have been far more
treatable, if diagnosed at an earlier stage of the disease process. Similarly, many conditions arising in
118
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
middle age or earlier may progress to conditions which in combination with natural processes of senescence
can be potentially far more serious (Dodig, Čepelak & Pavić, 2019).
Indicators of pathological processes, which might ultimately impact upon holistic processes of health
and wellbeing are characterised by medical histories which for example may detail those conditions
which were contracted or experienced in earlier life and which are now inactive but which may have a
direct impact on an older person’s capacity to cope with disease processes or indeed the degree of immune
response they illicit in relation to infection (Rice et al, 2017). These medical histories may also
provide an insight into current disease processes which are ultimately controlled by pharmacological
and lifestyle changes, such as Diabetes mellitus or hypertension (Sciomer, 2019). In relation to this
there can be an array of associated side effects of pharmacological interventions, which also mask signs
and symptoms of pathologies which would benefit from early clinical diagnosis and management. The
majority of these conditions can have a degree of relevance to the prevention of falls in ageing populations,
since many develop slowly and can be termed progressive in terms of their degenerative impact.
Typical example is atherosclerosis, which necessitates regular clinical monitoring so that medication
can be appropriately modified to account for different stages of pathological change. Other conditions
such as Multiple sclerosis or Rheumatoid arthritis can have relapsing and remitting stages, where preventative
care in relation to the potential for temporary or progressive changes in ambulatory health and
wellbeing can be successfully managed (Briggs, Thompson & Conway, 2019; Mankia & Emery, 2019).
This can have a direct impact on the overall longevity of these older adults where care interventions and
preventative measures ought to be tailored to the individual needs of each (Stambler, 2017). The value
of interprofessional and multi-disciplinary working arrangements between medical and allied healthcare
practitioners cannot be underestimated here, and the capacity of these team members to accommodate
functional change in ambulatory wellbeing is invaluable in the functional physiological avoidance of
falls (Kenny et al, 2017).
COMPLEX MEDICAL HISTORIES AND FALLS IN AGEING POPULATIONS
Of those diseases, which more commonly manifest in ageing populations, many predispose older adults
to falls, even those which may have started at an earlier stage in the life course trajectory (Brännström
et al, 2019). In conjunction with this, the assessment, diagnosis and prompt management of conditions
is made more complex by the fact that older people are far more likely to present with atypical or very
non-specific signs, which are often overlooked and quite wrongly attributed to ‘old age’ (Buttigieg et
al, 2018). What is worthy of note here, is that there is no one specific disease state that is particular to
age, although the likelihood of occurrence may increase as part of normal processes of physiological
senescence. Those disease states regarded as relatively minor in younger adults or children, can therefore
lead to more serious outcomes for older people, especially in relation to falls when older adults are
statistically far more likely to develop neurological, skeletal or vascular pathologies, all of which have a
potentially direct and negative impact on the quality and longevity of life (Cho et al, 2018). Given that
these conditions rarely exist in abstraction from one another the higher numbers of pathologies evident
in older adults can complicate diagnoses and predispose them to a greater likelihood of falling (Padrón-
Monedero et al, 2020).
119
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
FUNCTIONAL DEFINITIONS OF ‘OLD AGE’
Operationalising a functional definition of ‘old age’, is fraught with the danger of labelling someone on
the basis of the chronology of their age, rather than their stage of functional senescence. Since ageing
incorporates the age-related changes of functional decline (senescence) and those processes of pathological
change which ought not to be normalised, since there is the potential for them to be identified
as treatable and as a consequence curable or at least manageable. The associated decline in vitality and
the reduction in physiological performance at a cellular level can lead to a reduced capacity to cope
with environmental stressors and a correspondingly reduced capacity to cope either physically or psychologically
with processes and outcomes of disease. Ageing is a slow and iterative process, which is
largely variable impact at an individual level. The homogenisation that the term ‘old age’ brings to a
whole generation is neither useful clinically or socially and often leads only to unintentional ageism,
which directly impacts on the ability of older adults to access healthcare resources to the same extent
as their younger counterparts (Covey, 1992). The need for accurate diagnosis and management of pathology
ought not to be secondary to the recognition and value judgement attributable to changes in
the visible appearance of people and biased assumptions of their physiological or anatomical status as
a consequence. What cannot be denied is that the normal ageing process leads to death and that ageing
impacts on all chronologically old people to a greater or lesser extent. The progressive and gradual
deterioration of functionality and a lack of capacity for regulatory homeostasis in response to external
stressors ensures a steady and progressive decline. Cytologically, there is a natural decline in the number
of functional cells and in terms of medical assessment there is often a degree of ambiguity in relation
to which cells are actually malfunctioning due to physiological change or whether these can, with any
degree of confidence be attributed to the ageing process. Ultimately, there is no medical intervention
that can halt this process and as a consequence the optimal quality of life for patients ought sometimes
to be prioritised before the extension of their longevity. This systematic vulnerability to both disease and
external stressors of human physiology are what actually characterise what is traditionally attributed to
‘old age’. Disease and ageing in this sense, progressively and systematically cause the acceleration in a
reciprocal and irreversible process.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMICAL CHANGES IN AGEING
As an integral part of the ageing process, there are distinctive anatomical changes in organs and physiological
alterations that primarily lead to:
• Compromised neurotransmission
• Decrease in intellectual performance (e.g., leading to failing memory and confusion).
• Decreased renal perfusion
• Deterioration of special senses (e.g., leading to poor vision and loss of hearing)
• Exacerbation of deformity (due to the rigidity of collagen)
• Poor breathing capacity
• Poor oxygen uptake
• Reduced cardiac output
• Reduction in movement potential
120
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
• Reduction in nerve conduction velocity
PROGRESSIVE NERVOUS SYSTEM CHANGE IN AGEING
The sensitivity of the sympathetic receptors to circulating neurotransmitters is altered by the process of
natural senescence in ageing. The greater intensity of response in the cardiac and vascular systems in
older people have led to this being termed a hyperadrenergic state. In relation to a functional optimal
nervous system in older years, no system demonstrates more clearly the need to remain active and to
maintain a healthy lifestyle which engages capacity for ambulatory wellbeing and the prevention of falls
in later life. The neurological system is dynamic in the sense that it changes throughout adulthood, but
this trajectory of change increases exponentially after the age of sixty-five years. This manifests in a
decreased awareness to the sensations of touch and vibration (Mahbub, 2020). Increasing numbers of
neurofibrillary tangles which develop within nerve cell bodies as a consequence of ageing are evident
in the hippocampus. This is seen across all older people but to an even greater extent in those patients
living with dementia. Those who have dementia have an increased number of neuritic or senile plaques,
which have come to characterise the anatomical and physiological changes of Alzheimer’s disease (Sengoku,
2020). Senile plaques are thickened masses of degenerating neurites (constituted of small axons,
some dendrites, astrocytes) with an amyloid (starchy glycoprotein) deposit in the centre. Plaques most
commonly occur as a result of pathological ageing, as in Alzheimer’s disease, although they have also
been frequently observed in normal ageing, beginning in the fifth decade of life (Sharma et al, 2020).
From the perspective of biochemistry, the decrease in enzymes actively involved in processes of
neurotransmitter synthesis has been recorded alongside a diminishing number of receptor sites or
transmitters within the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The reduction in motor
system functionality is linked to the progressive decrease of dopamine uptake sites, which can be
directly attributed to the loss of axons in basal ganglia pathways as part of age-related change. Higher
order association areas lose a greater number of neurons than the primary motor or visual cortex during
the process of ageing, which has led to theories of how forgetfulness develops in older adulthood. Even
a minor degree of neuron loss and decline in the capacity of dendrites to produce new spines has an
impact. Whilst structural losses can be attributed to age related decline, which is also associated with
processes of synaptic remodelling. This is closely linked to an overall decrease in sensory perception,
alongside the presence of arteriosclerosis.
The functional implications of these changes all impact on the reaction time of older people. These
processes are often attributed to the overall slowing of reaction time and the process of voluntary motor
movement. Linked to physiological changes in muscles, this is another clear indicator of the need for
older people to maintain a degree of physical fitness, which contributes to the maintenance of optimal
reaction time in old people (Toots et al, 2019). Exercise in itself is not proven to significantly improve
reaction time though, since movement slowness is related to change in neural pathways rather than to
the extent of muscle health alone. Reaction time can basically be defined as the length of time between
stimulation and the motor response effected by it. It is also associated with nerve conduction velocity.
In terms of growth and development at the other end of life’s trajectory, reaction time progressively
improves as a child develops more complex and developed motor skills. Scientific studies of complex
reaction time detail that in research where there is a choice between two responses, that as the task
becomes progressively more complex, then reaction time increases in line with the increasing age of
121
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
the study participant. The complex neurological processes involved in maintaining balance, mean that
the individual risk of falls is exponentially higher in relation to their age, and this is accompanied by
a variable change in reaction times during progressive ageing once people reach the age of 60 years.
In the prevention of falls, older patients typically may be living with a number of chronic disease
states, for which they may be taking an equal number of medications. These systemic issues are predisposing
factors to falling, which have a wider impact than just that of the individual who experiences
them. Despite this, the chronologically aged ought never to be regarded as an indistinguishable category
of personhood for whom there is minimal potential for the prevention of falls or systemic deterioration.
The role of the health and social care multi-disciplinary team is invaluable in fulfilling this in the most
optimal manner possible for the elderly.
FUNCTIONAL COGNITIVE ABILITIES
The synergistic relationship between the sensory and motor system is the basis for theories of intelligence,
where cognition can be defined as the process of knowing and intelligence pertains to the application
of knowledge (Sari et al, 2020). Cognitive processes specifically include:
• Attention
• Decision making.
• Learning
• Problem solving
• Reasoning
Without a degree of cognitive ability, negotiating the process of human ambulation is impossible
and movement development is completely diminished. It is the nervous system which is responsible
for cognition via the processing of thought and memory, where memories can be classified according
to whether they are immediate, short or long term in duration. Whereas declarative memory entails the
immediacy of memory, which may only last seconds or at most minutes, longer term memories can be
recalled years later as they result in structural changes to the synapses that have a long-lasting impact
on signal conduction pathways. Ageing ensures an active decrease in capacity to undertake complex
cognitive skills which involve memory. In those adults who are living with movement decline, it is also
exceptionally important to consider their potential for change in memory ability.
Alongside these considerations, are considerations of what are termed either fluid or crystallised
intelligence. Whereas fluid intelligence pertains to the logical capacity to form novel associations, and
can be readily measured via tests of reaction time and memory, crystallised intelligence is linked to experience
and the learning associated with it. Whereas fluid intelligence peaks early in the second decade
and then diminishes, crystal intelligence forms the basis of wisdom and is deemed to increase with time.
The reason why some adults remain alert and active mentally and others disengage or show signs of
dementia still remains largely unknown and highlights the need for further research, which inevitably
will impact on the field of falls prevention research.
122
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
SENSORY DEFICITS
Motor activity in adulthood is guided by the sensory ability developed during adolescence. Decline in
sensory function begins in adulthood and is progressive in nature. It is important that these may or may
not link to a general decline in function and not necessarily all people experience them. From a somatic
perspective, some ageing adults demonstrate a clearly diminished ability to effectively detect touch,
vibration, temperature, and pain (Borzuola et al, 2020). The largest of the body’s sense organs, the skin
undergoes distinctive changes with ageing. From a structural perspective, the growth rate of the skin and
its capacity to regulate temperature, injury response and to undertake growth diminish. Whilst extremes
of temperature can be readily detected by older adults, their capacity to detect subtle temperature change
is diminished. The sympathetic nervous system controls the degree of vasoconstriction and vasodilation
to the skin and this is also impaired. Pain perception is still not fully understood in relation to the ageing
process. Whilst deep pain diminishes with age, as yet research reports both an increase and a decrease
in superficial pain sensitivity. What is abundantly clear, however, is the degree of vibrationary sensation
diminishment which occurs in older adults usually starting at around the age of 50 but mainly in the feet
and legs. The decline in sense of where joint positions are in space declines more evidently in women,
particularly in relation to static joint position sensation at the knee joint, which may or may not be attributable
to the functional impact of a gynaecoid pelvic girdle and the position the knees relative to the
hips, but this has not yet been proven (Maitre et al, 2013). This can impair balance and may contribute
to the increased incidence of reported falls in elderly women, which is a significant aetiological factor
in all-cause mortality and morbidity.
MOTOR DEFICITS
The incidence of vertigo and dizziness are very common presentations in general practice in patients
aged over 50 years. The vestibular system and in particular hair cells are demonstrably degenerating
with the consequent symptomology of dizziness. In relation to the vestibular nerve, by the time a person
reaches the age of 75 years, the overall amount of myelinated nerve fibres has been reduced to just 60%
(Liu et al, 2017). Because of this, reliance on the vestibular system alone can result in falls, an important
consideration in falls prevention strategies. Healthy older people with less of a degree of sensory deficit,
have less of a degree of postural sway than those who do and as a consequence are far less likely to fall.
OCULAR CHANGES
With a general increase in visual acuity increases in the twenties and thirties, which remains largely
unaltered through to the forties and then declines, it is notable that by the age of 85 years there is an 80%
less of visual acuity (Saftari & Kwon, 2018). It is the anatomical structural changes in the eye, which
contribute to the apparent functional change. Accompanying processes of ageing, central vision may be
impacted upon by the development of cataracts, which cause alteration of the lens. By the time people
reach the age of 65, it is estimated that 60% of all people have a general reduction in their lens transparency
(Donaldson et al, 2017). Cases of cataracts are more common in patients living with Diabetes mellitus.
123
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
VISUAL CHANGE IN RELATION TO THE POTENTIAL OF FALLS
Progressively the eye yellows due to the functional ageing process (Saftari & Kwon, 2018). The overall
pupil size decreases and less light can enter the eye. By the time a person reaches the age of 60 years,
the pupil has declined in size by at least 33%, with the resultant outcome that older people are far less
likely to be able to detect low levels of light (Wolffsohn & Davies, 2019). If light becomes scattered
over more of the retinal surface, then this results in glare. This glare then introduces external sources
of light into the eye and because of retinal sensitivity loss, sudden flashes of light from headlights can
transiently overstimulate the eyes. Alongside these manifestations, the contrast sensitivity and processes
of adaptation to the dark decline dramatically with age. The loss of contrast sensitivity causes a loss of
perception of depth, a major cause of falls on dark staircases and consequently a major aetiological factor
in the increased incidence and prevalence rate of falls in the elderly (Rubiño et al, 2020). Whereas
an adolescent might have functional adjustment to the dark in less than seven minutes, an 80 year old’s
eyes may well take up to forty (Wang, Hiang & Chen, 2020).
The gradual and progressive thickening of the lens and a consequent inability to focus is called presbyopia.
With progressing age, from 40 onwards, there may be issues with adjustment from near sighted
positions to long sighted perspectives. This can have important ramifications in being able to judge
functional distance and can have an impact on falls and consequently falls prevention, where regular
eye tests and the prescription of lenses for spectacles, where necessary, can be addressed. When there is
a lack of functional capacity to adapt to change altogether, usually at the age of 60 or above, the person
is said to have presbyopia (Mordi & Ciuffreda, 1998).
Whilst not especially relevant to the context of falls prevention, it is also important to remember the
changes in hearing acuity, which occur as a consequence of the ageing process as an integral part of
functional senescence. It is usually high frequency tones, which are first affected but the capacity for
speech is less impacted upon, since speech is heard at a lower sound frequency, although in instances
of presbycusis, there might also be issues with speech processing and discrimination. This lack of discriminatory
ability has more of a functional impact than hearing loss alone. Over 75% of all adults aged
over the age of 75 years will experience this to a certain extent (ibid, 1998). Other associated sensory
losses are in relation to the perceptions of taste and smell. It is pressure detection on the tongue which
progressively alters, rather than tastebud functional decline, which is widely reported. Odour intensity
detection capacity also decreases with age. There may also be issues of memory distortion and changes
in relation to the psychology of eating, which impact on the perception of flavour and consequently the
appeal of food for older people (Locher et al, 2009).
ADJUSTMENT TO ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT AND SETTING
It is the modification of motor behaviour, which has the greatest impact in the consideration of the aetiological
prevention of falls. This can impact directly, along with musculoskeletal change on the capacity of
people to remain mobile on uneven terrain or in situations or environments with which they are unfamiliar
(Lee & Ailshire, 2020). Sometimes older adults then need to use walking sticks or Zimmerframes, which
can have an impact on self-image, as well as curtailing capacity for the individual movements they are
capable of (Bertrand et al, 2017). Personality also impacts upon older peoples’ perceptions of themselves
in terms of their individuality and the homogenisation they sometimes feel as they are classified on the
124
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
basis of their chronological age. This can also impact on their hesitancy to use aids to walking, which
may be perceived as the preserve of the ‘old aged’ (Canada et al, 2020).
FUNCTIONAL ADAPTATIONS TO MOBILITY IN AGEING
Reaction time is commonly used to tangibly measure the capacity of an individual’s central nervous
system to pre-empt, initiate and sustain movement (Woo, Shin & Park, 2020). It has been found that in
people aged 50 to 90 there is a directly linear increase in the time needed to plan for precise movements
of the distal extremities.
Whilst there is no universally accepted definition of fitness, and this is as individual as everyone
alive, there are some very general definitions, which describe fitness as a state of optimal wellbeing and
the capacity to successfully meet the present and potential physical challenges of life. This has obvious
implications during the process of ageing and consequently senescence. To be fit, therefore, is to be
adapted, adjusted, qualified or suited to some purpose, function or aim. ‘Fit’ also describes a person in
good physical condition, or ‘healthy’. Physical fitness allows one, regardless of their age, to carry out
daily tasks with a degree of alertness, without any sense of undue fatigue and with remaining energy to
enjoy leisurely activities as well as being deliberately productive (Gadelha, 2018).
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH AND FITNESS IN AGEING
Various additional variables out with chronological age can impact on relative fitness levels, such as
growth and gender (Rea, 2017). What is clear, however, is that the capacity to undertake physical tasks
iteratively declines with increasing age. Whilst this decline is primarily attributable to physical changes
of senescence it is also evident that social and environmental factors are also greatly influential. This
may be due to the decreased level of physical activity that older adults partake exercise performance
levels can also be unduly influenced by environmental factors such as levels of pollution and air quality.
SOCIAL FACTORS IMPACTING ON PROCESSES OF AGEING
As well as the concept of longevity, social determinants of health have a great impact on the overall
quality of lives lived, in contemporary society, namely:
• Educational opportunity – which provides a mechanism which people can become upwardly socially
mobile and in turn be empowered and inspired to maintain a standard of living associated
with positive health and wellbeing choices (Breen & Müller, 2020).
• Emergent technologies – which have ensured an access to both knowledge and the capacity to
communicate never experienced prior to now.
• Public safety – which ensures that societal protection is evident in relation to the overall health
and wellbeing of citizens and which can positively impact on quality of life and wellbeing (Prince
et al, 2015).
125
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
• Social norms and attitudes, such as discrimination – being able to empower and provide a voice to
what have been perceived as the most vulnerable members of society via democracy has enabled
millions of people to live longer, more productive and healthier lives, instead of the oppression
caused by discrimination on the basis of gender, sexual orientation, race or religion (Burnes,
2019).
• Social order – which impacts on the capacity of all people to live in areas that have a tangibly
lower degree of exposure to crime, violence, and social disorder, all of which can make a radical
difference to perceived and actual health and wellbeing status (Baumann et al, 2020).
• Social support and social interactions characterise human behaviour – in instances where people
do not have these, they are at an increasingly greater risk of the development of anxiety and depression,
which can have a cumulative and long term impact on perceptions and lived experiences
of health and wellbeing (Briggs, Kennelly & Kenny, 2018).
• Socio-economics – the impact of available finances obviously impacts on the ability of people to
access a regular income and to sustain a level of living that is commensurate with positive health
and wellbeing (Petrovic, 2018).
• Transport infrastructure – being able to have access to travel, being able to drive and having access
to transport both enhance quality of life and achievable life experience. In some instances,
this can also impact on the access to healthcare resources that people have, which can have a great
impact on their capacity to regularly attend appointments or ensure their general health is optimal
(Johnson et al, 2017).
PROGRESSIVE DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGE IN VASCULAR SYSTEM AGEING
Structural anatomical changes become evident in the heart, valves, and vasculature with natural processes
of ageing and normal senescence (Laina, Stellos & Stamatelopoulos, 2018). Within both the endocardium
and the myocardium, elastic tissue, fat and collagen increase in the endocardium and myocardium of
the heart, the outcome of which is a stiffer and far less compliant ventricular system (ibid, 2018). There
is also an increased incidence of electrocardiographic abnormalities in the hears of older adults, with a
demonstrable decrease beyond the age of 60 years of cells in the sinoatrial node (Nishijima et al, 2018).
Accompanying this, the valves become progressively thicker and more calcified, and this impacts on
the closure and overall efficiency of the cardiac valves (ibid, 2018).
The proximal arteries tend to dilate in parallel with increasing chronological age (Singam, Fine,
& Fleg, 2020). The increased amount of connective tissue and lipid deposition leads to a progressive
thickening of the blood vessels. The consequent outcomes of this are an increase in vascular rigidity and
a reduction in vascular compliance.
Within the cardiovascular system there are also notable changes in relation to ageing, which are
not immediately apparent during rest. The increases at rest of the systolic and diastolic blood pressure
can be attributed to the increased stiffness of the vascular system and decreased size of the peripheral
vascular bed.
The compliance and elastic recoil of the pulmonary system are impacted upon by processes of natural
senescence too, making it harder for respiratory muscles to move air into the system (Romano &
Romano, 2020). The most evident being:
126
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
• Increased anterior-posterior diameter of the thorax
• Increased rigidity of the bronchioles
• Increased stiffness of the chest wall
• Structural changes in the elastic fibres of the lungs.
• Thickening of the mucous layer of the lungs
• Thoracic ankylosis and kyphosis
As a consequence of these changes, residual volume increases since more air is actively retained
within the lungs. The amount of inspiratory reserve, expiratory reserve and vital capacity is reduced
during both rest and active states. Alongside this, the surface area available for gas exchange also decreases
due to changes in the function of the alveoli and substantial decrease in the number of pulmonary
capillaries. Responses to ventilation in relation to increased levels of carbon dioxide or reduced levels
of oxygen are also attributable to receptor, muscular or neuronal change. Ventilatory response in the
elderly differs in older people can often be an indicator of exercise tolerance levels. There is evidence
to suggest that training can effectively improve the changes in lung function which have been attributed
to age (Seixas, 2020).
Older adults are generally happy with their level of fitness but underestimate their ability to exercise.
As a consequence of this, they are less inclined to engage in exercise that is challenging to them, which
again can have an impact in terms of how they react to exercise (Heiestad, Gjestvang, & Haakstad, 2020).
As a consequence, this can place more physiological pressure on already vulnerable systems. where this
develops to the worst extent older people may not be able to continue their daily activities of living with
a functional state of dependency ensuing.
VISUAL INDICATORS OF AGEING
The gradual progression of grey and thinning hair, accompanied by skin wrinkling and decreased
muscle tone and increasing fatty deposits, typically characterises old age. Physiologically comparable
is the gradual deteriorating response to environmental stressors, with renal and digestive functionality
progressively diminishing (Baker & Blakely, 2017. The functional response of the body to temperature
regulation, dietary intake and oxygen supply means that the maintenance of a constant internal environment
is more physiologically challenging. Alongside the progressive decline in the sheer number of cells
older adults have, there is also a diminished functionality of those that remain. Beyond the context of
the cells themselves, the extracellular fibres also change in terms of their quality, optimal strength and
overall number. The arterial walls harden and there is an increased incidence of arteriosclerosis. This is
primarily attributable to the thickening of elastin and the uptake of calcium across the cell membrane,
which causes the characteristic thickening and hardening of the condition. Processes of mitosis become
progressively reduced and diminished leading to the production of fewer replacement cells in the heart,
bones and muscles (ibid, 2017).
In relation to the prevention of falls, these physiological changes are contributors to the physiological
vulnerability of older people. Particularly where older adults develop more general issues in relation to
their ambulatory health and wellbeing, where chronological age increases, the incidence of falls also
exponentially increases. In relation to generalised pathological and age-related change in the feet and
lower limbs. The likelihood of tissue breakdown in the foot and lower limb is increased by ischaemia
127
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
and peripheral oedema (Muchna et al, 2018). Healing can be further impaired by poor dietary intake,
avitaminosis and poor tissue perfusion. Elderly people are more prone to develop neoplastic disease, as
the incidence of neoplasm increases with advancing age. The disease state in the elderly is predominantly
one of multisystem pathologies, many of which will be chronic degenerative processes that impair healing
and negatively impact on the individual’s overall wellbeing.
Overall constitutional deterioration predisposes older adults to the development of pneumonia,
particularly in those cases where they have been confined to bed for a prolonged period or in instances
where there is a concomitant decreased cardiac or pulmonary function or respiratory infection (Focillo,
2020). As a clinical outcome, pneumonia is also a common and frequently fatal complication following
the occurrence of cardiovascular accident (CVA) or hip fracture, where major orthopaedic intervention
is required and prolonged periods of immobilisation occur. Since generalised arteriosclerosis is more
common in elderly patients, there can be extensive pathological change to the renal, coronary and cerebral
vessels, resulting in pulmonary and peripheral oedema (Ungvari, 2018).
FALLS IN THE ELDERLY: THE FUNCTIONAL PHYSIOLOGY
The physiological impact of falls in the elderly can also lead to what is commonly known as ‘post-fall
syndrome’ (Meyer et al, 2020). This leads to a reluctance to resume normal activities, stunted progress in
the restoration of occupational normality and potentially anxiety and depressive episodes. The origin of
these falls is often systemic in nature but can sometimes also be attributed to extraneous variables such
as the external environment or the introduction of new drug therapies (Musich et al, 2017). In addition
to this, from an anatomical and physiological perspective the origins of falls in the elderly can emanate
from dysfunction or impairment, most commonly in relation to:
• Connective tissue disorders
• Dementia
• Endocrine disorders
• Myopathies
• Neurological deficit
• Vestibular function
• Visual capacity
THE FUNCTIONAL PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPACT OF POLYPHARMACY
As incidence and prevalence rates of multi-morbidity increase, so too do rates of polypharmacy (Kingston
et al, 2018). Polypharmacy is defined as the concomitant use of five or more medications per 24-hour
period by any individual, however many older patients use considerably higher numbers of medication
(Delgado et al, 2020). Not only are prescribed medications used to treat the clinical symptomology of
recognisable pathologies, they are often used to ensure that patients can live a more bearable life in
relation to their potential to experience pain, as a consequence of natural processes of degeneration, so
characterised by ageing and natural senescence (Veronese et al, 2017).
128
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
Since older adults can develop a pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics response to drugs as a
consequence of increased physiological sensitivity, then they are also more likely to present with issues
impacting upon their ambulatory health and wellbeing with symptoms such as dizziness (van den
Anker, 2018). The need to reduce the amount of drugs taken due to the fact older people have decreased
liver function and as such a correspondingly decreased capacity to optimally metabolise medication
also places them at increased risk of adverse drug reaction (Drenth‐van Maanen, Wilting & Jansen,
2020). Typical examples of these are local anaesthetics such as lignocaine or tricyclic anti-depressants,
alongside stimulants such as caffeine. Systemic issues with renal clearance or renal dysfunction as part
of the natural processes of senescence can also mean that drugs are not excreted effectively and remain
in the system longer than they ought to – typical examples of these are those medications such as antihypertensive
agents, which can directly result in postural hypotension and because of this, ambulatory
unsteadiness and falls (Navaratnarajah & Jackson, 2017). Recent research by van der Velde et al (2022)
reveals and addresses issues surrounding the vast complexity of balancing the need to address falls and
the challenges faced within the context of gerontological care provision, across Europe.
Added to the potential for complex dose regimen, for patients who might also have functional and/
or untreated ocular decline, then the potential for drugs to be taken which are incompatible or even
completely contradicted, is increased (Kim & Parish, 2017). Anti-hypertensive medications are not
the alone as a significant drug group influencing the rate of falls in the elderly. Others include minor
tranquillisers, hypnotics and sedatives, all of which can instigate postural instability, another precursor
to falls. Considering their potential to depress central nervous system, this is hardly surprising. Those
medications prescribed to reduce pain and swelling for musculoskeletal pain and injury such as nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs can also have side effects of fluid retention or oedematous lower limbs
accompanied by dizziness, postural instability and a predisposition to fall. Postural hypotension can
also be an unanticipated side effect of tricyclic antidepressants and diuretics, where blackouts, dizziness
and fainting can be precursors to serious falls (Pan et al, 2018). Osteoporosis can be a side effect of the
long-term use of systemic corticosteroids, which can also lower immunity to infection and predispose
patients to an increased likelihood of falls and bone fractures (Rice et al, 2017). Work of the greatest
significance to date for older adults is the potential for deliberate interventions posited at reducing the
unnecessary prescription of medication, which within the context of polypharmacy addresses the issues
of the evidence-based benefits versus risks of increased prescribing (Seppala et al, 2021; Seppala et al,
2022).
CONCLUSION
The process of normal ageing is fraught with the potential for additional diseases which can run concurrently
with abnormal pathologies, which may remain undiagnosed or undetected. All have the potential
to impact on the general health and ambulatory wellbeing of older adults, which can accompany natural
processes of senescence to the ultimate degenerative state of death. Being able to embed a working
knowledge of the functional anatomy and physiology of old age, regardless of original academic discipline
or professional identity is fundamental to being able to intervene with strategies to ensure optimal
safeguarding against unintentional falls. This chapter has provided only a brief introductory overview to
the most common physiological and anatomical changes, alongside considerations of polypharmacy and
the wider implications of co-morbidities in older people. Whilst this chapter is relatively functional in
129
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
approach to the annotation of anatomy and physiology, it ought also to be noted that beyond this underpinning
knowledge, older people ought to be facilitated and empowered to share their own perceptions,
needs and wants of how they wish to age and how they would prefer to live lives as fulfilling as they
wish. As healthcare professionals, our privilege is to address and act on the seminally scientific facts,
alongside their voices of lived experience in the co-construction of new knowledge.
REFERENCES
Academic. (2022). World Guidelines for Falls Prevention and Management for Older Adults. A Global
Initiative. Oxford Academic. https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/ageing/afac205
Alcañiz, M., & Solé-Auró, A. (2018). Feeling good in old age: Factors explaining health-related quality
of life. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 16(1), 48. doi:10.118612955-018-0877-z PMID:29534708
Baker, N. R., & Blakely, K. K. (2017). Gastrointestinal disturbances in the elderly. Nursing Clinics,
52(3), 419–431. PMID:28779823
Bartosch, P. S., Kristensson, J., McGuigan, F. E., & Akesson, K. E. (2020). Frailty and prediction of
recurrent falls over 10 years in a community cohort of 75-year-old women. Aging Clinical and Experimental
Research, 32(11), 1–10. doi:10.100740520-019-01467-1 PMID:31939201
Baumann, D., Ruch, W., Margelisch, K., Gander, F., & Wagner, L. (2020). Character strengths and life
satisfaction in later life: An analysis of different living conditions. Applied Research in Quality of Life,
15(2), 329–347. doi:10.100711482-018-9689-x
Bertrand, K., Raymond, M. H., Miller, W. C., Ginis, K. A. M., & Demers, L. (2017). Walking aids for
enabling activity and participation: A systematic review. American Journal of Physical Medicine &
Rehabilitation, 96(12), 894–903. doi:10.1097/PHM.0000000000000836 PMID:29176406
Bisdorff, A., Bosser, G., Gueguen, R., & Perrin, P. (2013). The epidemiology of vertigo, dizziness, and
unsteadiness and its links to co-morbidities. Frontiers in Neurology, 4, 29. doi:10.3389/fneur.2013.00029
PMID:23526567
Borzuola, R., Giombini, A., Torre, G., Campi, S., Albo, E., Bravi, M., Borrione, P., Fossati, C., & Macaluso,
A. (2020). Central and Peripheral Neuromuscular Adaptations to Ageing. Journal of Clinical
Medicine, 9(3), 741. doi:10.3390/jcm9030741 PMID:32182904
Brännström, J., Lövheim, H., Gustafson, Y., & Nordström, P. (2019). Association between antidepressant
drug use and hip fracture in older people before and after treatment initiation. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(2),
172–179. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.3679 PMID:30601883
Breen, R., & Müller, W. (2020). Education and intergenerational social mobility in Europe and the
United States. Stanford University Press.
Briggs, R., Kennelly, S. P., & Kenny, R. A. (2018). Does baseline depression increase the risk of unexplained
and accidental falls in a cohort of community‐dwelling older people? Data from The Irish Longitudinal
Study on Ageing (TILDA). International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 33(2), e205–e211.
doi:10.1002/gps.4770 PMID:28766755
130
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
Burnes, D., Sheppard, C., Henderson, C. R. Jr, Wassel, M., Cope, R., Barber, C., & Pillemer, K. (2019).
Interventions to reduce ageism against older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. American
Journal of Public Health, 109(8), e1–e9. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2019.305123 PMID:31219720
Buttigieg, S. C., Ilinca, S., de Sao Jose, J. M., & Larsson, A. T. (2018). Researching ageism in health-care
and long term care. In Contemporary perspectives on ageism (pp. 493–515). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-73820-8_29
Canada, B., Stephan, Y., Sutin, A. R., & Terracciano, A. (2020). Personality and falls among older
adults: Evidence from a longitudinal cohort. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 75(9), 1905–1910.
doi:10.1093/geronb/gbz040 PMID:30945733
Cho, B. Y., Seo, D. C., Lin, H. C., Lohrmann, D. K., & Chomistek, A. K. (2018). BMI and central obesity
with falls among community-dwelling older adults. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 54(4),
e59–e66. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2017.12.020 PMID:29433954
Covey, H. C. (1992). The definitions of the beginning of old age in history. International Journal of Aging
& Human Development, 34(4), 325–337. doi:10.2190/GBXB-BE1F-1BU1-7FKK PMID:1607219
Delgado, J., Jones, L., Bradley, M. C., Allan, L. M., Ballard, C., Clare, L., & Melzer, D. (2020). Potentially
inappropriate prescribing in dementia, multi-morbidity and incidence of adverse health outcomes.
Age and Ageing. PMID:32946561
Dodig, S., Čepelak, I., & Pavić, I. (2019). Hallmarks of senescence and aging. Biochemia medica. Biochemia
Medica, 29(3), 483–497. doi:10.11613/BM.2019.030501 PMID:31379458
Donaldson, P. J., Grey, A. C., Heilman, B. M., Lim, J. C., & Vaghefi, E. (2017). The physiological optics
of the lens. Progress in Retinal and Eye Research, 56, e1–e24. doi:10.1016/j.preteyeres.2016.09.002
PMID:27639549
Drake, S. A., Conway, S. H., Yang, Y., Cheatham, L. S., Wolf, D. A., Adams, S. D., Wade, C. E., &
Holcomb, J. B. (2021). When falls become fatal—Clinical care sequence. PLoS One, 16(1), e0244862.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0244862 PMID:33406164
Drenth‐van Maanen, A. C., Wilting, I., & Jansen, P. A. (2020). Prescribing medicines to older people—
How to consider the impact of ageing on human organ and body functions. British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 86(10), 1921–1930. doi:10.1111/bcp.14094 PMID:31425638
Faragher, R. G., McArdle, A., Willows, A., & Ostler, E. L. (2017). Senescence in the aging process.
F1000 Research, 6. PMID:28781767
Foccillo, G. (2020). The Infections Causing Acute Respiratory Failure in Elderly Patients. In Ventilatory
Support and Oxygen Therapy in Elder, Palliative and End-of-Life Care Patients (pp. 35–45). Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-26664-6_5
Gadelha, A. B., Neri, S. G. R., Bottaro, M., & Lima, R. M. (2018). The relationship between muscle
quality and incidence of falls in older community-dwelling women: An 18-month follow-up study. Experimental
Gerontology, 110, 241–246. doi:10.1016/j.exger.2018.06.018 PMID:29935953
131
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
Gazibara, T., Kurtagic, I., Kisic‐Tepavcevic, D., Nurkovic, S., Kovacevic, N., Gazibara, T., & Pekmezovic,
T. (2017). Falls, risk factors and fear of falling among persons older than 65 years of age. Psychogeriatrics,
17(4), 215–223. doi:10.1111/psyg.12217 PMID:28130862
Heiestad, H., Gjestvang, C., & Haakstad, L. A. (2020). Investigating self-perceived health and quality
of life: A longitudinal prospective study among beginner recreational exercisers in a fitness club setting.
BMJ Open, 10(6), e036250. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-036250 PMID:32513890
Herranz, N., & Gil, J. (2018). Mechanisms and functions of cellular senescence. The Journal of Clinical
Investigation, 128(4), 1238–1246. doi:10.1172/JCI95148 PMID:29608137
Johnson, R., Shaw, J., Berding, J., Gather, M., & Rebstock, M. (2017). European national government
approaches to older people’s transport system needs. Transport Policy, 59, 17–27. doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.
2017.06.005
Katsuumi, G., Shimizu, I., Yoshida, Y., & Minamino, T. (2018). Vascular senescence in cardiovascular
and metabolic diseases. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 5, 18. doi:10.3389/fcvm.2018.00018
PMID:29556500
Kenny, R. A., Romero-Ortuno, R., & Kumar, P. (2017). Falls in older adults. Medicine, 45(1), 28–33.
doi:10.1016/j.mpmed.2016.10.007 PMID:28298236
Kim, J., & Parish, A. L. (2017). Polypharmacy and medication management in older adults. Nursing
Clinics, 52(3), 457–468. doi:10.1016/j.cnur.2017.04.007 PMID:28779826
Kingston, A., Robinson, L., Booth, H., Knapp, M., & Jagger, C. (2018). Projections of multi-morbidity
in the older population in England to 2035: Estimates from the Population Ageing and Care Simulation
(PACSim) model. Age and Ageing, 47(3), 374–380. doi:10.1093/ageing/afx201 PMID:29370339
Lee, H., & Ailshire, J. (2020). Neighborhood and Housing Conditions and Risk of Falls. Innovation in
Aging, 4(Suppl 1), 651–652. doi:10.1093/geroni/igaa057.2245
Liu, H., Yang, Y., Xia, Y., Zhu, W., Leak, R. K., Wei, Z., Wang, J., & Hu, X. (2017). Aging of cerebral
white matter. Ageing Research Reviews, 34, 64–76. doi:10.1016/j.arr.2016.11.006 PMID:27865980
Locher, J. L., Ritchie, C. S., Roth, D. L., Sen, B., Vickers, K. S., & Vailas, L. I. (2009). Food choice
among homebound older adults: Motivations and perceived barriers. JNHA-The Journal of Nutrition.
Health and Aging, 13(8), 659–664. PMID:19657547
Mahbub, M. H., Hase, R., Yamaguchi, N., Hiroshige, K., Harada, N., Bhuiyan, A. N. M., & Tanabe, T.
(2020). Acute Effects of Whole-Body Vibration on Peripheral Blood Flow, Vibrotactile Perception and
Balance in Older Adults. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(3),
1069. doi:10.3390/ijerph17031069 PMID:32046205
Maitre, J., Jully, J. L., Gasnier, Y., & Paillard, T. (2013). Chronic physical activity preserves efficiency
of proprioception in postural control in older women. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development,
50(6).
Mankia, K., & Emery, P. (2019). Palindromic rheumatism as part of the rheumatoid arthritis continuum.
Nature Reviews. Rheumatology, 15(11), 687–695. doi:10.103841584-019-0308-5 PMID:31595059
132
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
Meyer, M., Constancias, F., Vogel, T., Kaltenbach, G., & Schmitt, E. (2020). Gait Disorder among Elderly
People, Psychomotor Disadaptation Syndrome: Post-Fall Syndrome, Risk Factors and Follow-Up–A
Cohort Study of 70 Patients. Gerontology, 1–8. PMID:33254165
Mielenz, T. J., Kannoth, S., Jia, H., Pullyblank, K., Sorensen, J., Estabrooks, P., Stevens, J. A., & Strogatz,
D. (2020). Evaluating a two-level vs. three-level fall risk screening algorithm for predicting falls
among older adults. Frontiers in Public Health, 8, 8. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00373 PMID:32903603
Mordi, J. A., & Ciuffreda, K. J. (1998). Static aspects of accommodation: Age and presbyopia. Vision
Research, 38(11), 1643–1653. doi:10.1016/S0042-6989(97)00336-2 PMID:9747501
Moreland, B., Kakara, R., & Henry, A. (2020). Trends in nonfatal falls and fall-related injuries among
adults aged≥ 65 years—United States, 2012–2018. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(27),
875–881. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6927a5 PMID:32644982
Muchna, A., Najafi, B., Wendel, C. S., Schwenk, M., Armstrong, D. G., & Mohler, J. (2018). Foot
problems in older adults: Associations with incident falls, frailty syndrome, and sensor-derived gait,
balance, and physical activity measures. Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association, 108(2),
126–139. doi:10.7547/15-186 PMID:28853612
Navaratnarajah, A., & Jackson, S. H. (2017). The physiology of ageing. Medicine, 45(1), 6–10. doi:10.1016/j.
mpmed.2016.10.008 PMID:28065164
Nishijima, D. K., Lin, A. L., Weiss, R. E., Yagapen, A. N., Malveau, S. E., Adler, D. H., Bastani, A.,
Baugh, C. W., Caterino, J. M., Clark, C. L., Diercks, D. B., Hollander, J. E., Nicks, B. A., Shah, M. N.,
Stiffler, K. A., Storrow, A. B., Wilber, S. T., & Sun, B. C. (2018). ECG predictors of cardiac arrhythmias
in older adults with syncope. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 71(4), 452–461. doi:10.1016/j.annemergmed.
2017.11.014 PMID:29275946
Padrón-Monedero, A., Pastor-Barriuso, R., García López, F. J., Martínez Martín, P., & Damián, J. (2020).
Falls and long-term survival among older adults residing in care homes. PLoS One, 15(5), e0231618.
Pan, Q., Zhang, Y., Long, T., He, W., Zhang, S., Fan, Y., & Zhou, J. (2018). Diagnosis of Vertigo and
dizziness syndromes in a neurological outpatient clinic. European Neurology, 79(5-6), 287–294.
Petrovic, D., de Mestral, C., Bochud, M., Bartley, M., Kivimäki, M., Vineis, P., & Stringhini, S. (2018).
The contribution of health behaviors to socioeconomic inequalities in health: A systematic review.
Preventive Medicine, 113, 15–31.
Prince, M. J., Wu, F., Guo, Y., Robledo, L. M. G., O’Donnell, M., Sullivan, R., & Yusuf, S. (2015). The
burden of disease in older people and implications for health policy and practice. Lancet, 385(9967),
549–562.
Rea, I. M. (2017). Towards ageing well: Use it or lose it: Exercise, epigenetics, and cognition. Biogerontology,
18(4), 679–691.
Rice, J. B., White, A. G., Scarpati, L. M., Wan, G., & Nelson, W. W. (2017). Long-term systemic corticosteroid
exposure: A systematic literature review. Clinical Therapeutics, 39(11), 2216–2229.
133
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
Romano, A., & Romano, R. (2020). Gas Exchange and Control of Breathing in Elderly and End-of-Life
Diseases. In Ventilatory Support and Oxygen Therapy in Elder, Palliative and End-of-Life Care Patients
(pp. 15–20). Springer.
Rubiño, J. A., Gamundí, A., Akaarir, M., Canellas, F., Rial, R., & Nicolau, M. C. (2020). Bright Light
Therapy and Circadian Cycles in Institutionalized Elders. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 14.
Saftari, L. N., & Kwon, O. S. (2018). Ageing vision and falls: A review. Journal of Physiological Anthropology,
37(1), 1–14.
Sari, R. K., Sutiadiningsih, A., Zaini, H., Meisarah, F., & Hubur, A. A. (2020). Factors affecting cognitive
intelligence theory. Journal of Critical Reviews, 7(17), 402–410.
Schapmire, T. J., Head, B. A., Nash, W. A., Yankeelov, P. A., Furman, C. D., Wright, R. B., & Faul,
A. C. (2018). Overcoming barriers to interprofessional education in gerontology: The interprofessional
curriculum for the care of older adults. Advances in Medical Education and Practice, 9, 109.
Sciomer, S., Moscucci, F., Maffei, S., Gallina, S., & Mattioli, A. V. (2019). Prevention of cardiovascular
risk factors in women: The lifestyle paradox and stereotypes we need to defeat. European Journal of
Preventive Cardiology, 26(6), 609–610.
Seixas, M. B., Almeida, L. B., Trevizan, P. F., Martinez, D. G., Laterza, M. C., Vanderlei, L. C. M., &
Silva, L. P. (2020). Effects of inspiratory muscle training in older adults. Respiratory Care, 65(4), 535–544.
Sengoku, R. (2020). Aging and Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Neuropathology, 40(1), 22–29.
Seppala, L. J., Kamkar, N., van Poelgeest, E. P., Thomsen, K., Daams, J. G., Ryg, J., & van der Velde, N.
(2022). Medication reviews and deprescribing as a single intervention in falls prevention: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Age and ageing, 51(9), afac191.
Seppala, L. J., Petrovic, M., Ryg, J., Bahat, G., Topinkova, E., Szczerbińska, K., & Van der Velde, N.
(2021). STOPPFall (screening tool of older persons prescriptions in older adults with high fall risk): A
Delphi study by the EuGMS task and finish group on fall-risk-increasing drugs. Age and Ageing, 50(4),
1189–1199.
Sharma, P., Sharma, A., Fayaz, F., Wakode, S., & Pottoo, F. H. (2020). Biological Signatures of Alzheimer’s
Disease. Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 20(9), 770–781.
Singam, N. S. V., Fine, C., & Fleg, J. L. (2020). Cardiac changes associated with vascular aging. Clinical
Cardiology, 43(2), 92–98.
Skinner, M. W., Andrews, G. J., & Cutchin, M. P. (Eds.). (2017). Geographical gerontology: Perspectives,
concepts, approaches. Routledge.
Stambler, I. (2017). Recognizing degenerative aging as a treatable medical condition: Methodology and
policy. Aging and Disease, 8(5), 583.
Tieland, M., Trouwborst, I., & Clark, B. C. (2018). Skeletal muscle performance and ageing. Journal
of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle, 9(1), 3–19.
134
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
Toots, A., Wiklund, R., Littbrand, H., Nordin, E., Nordström, P., Lundin-Olsson, L., & Rosendahl, https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/neup.12626E. (2019). The effects of exercise on falls in older
people with dementia living in nursing homes: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American
Medical Directors Association, 20(7), 835-842.
Tornero-Quiñones, I., Sáez-Padilla, J., Espina Díaz, A., Abad Robles, M. T., & Sierra Robles, Á. (2020).
Functional ability, frailty and risk of falls in the elderly: Relations with autonomy in daily living. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(3), 1006.
Ungvari, Z., Tarantini, S., Donato, A. J., Galvan, V., & Csiszar, A. (2018). Mechanisms of vascular aging.
Circulation Research, 123(7), 849–867.
van den Anker, J., Reed, M. D., Allegaert, K., & Kearns, G. L. (2018). Developmental changes in pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 58, S10–S25.
van der Velde, N., Seppala, L., Petrovic, M., Ryg, J., Tan, M. P., Montero-Odasso, M., & Masud, T.
(2022). Sustainable fall prevention across Europe: Challenges and opportunities. Aging Clinical and
Experimental Research, 34(10), 2553–2556.
van Onna, M., & Boonen, A. (2016). The challenging interplay between rheumatoid arthritis, ageing
and comorbidities. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 17(1), 184.
Veronese, N., Stubbs, B., Noale, M., Solmi, M., Pilotto, A., Vaona, A., & Maggi, S. (2017). Polypharmacy
is associated with higher frailty risk in older people: An 8-year longitudinal cohort study. Journal
of the American Medical Directors Association, 18(7), 624–628.
Wang, Y., Huang, H., & Chen, G. (2020). Effects of lighting on ECG, visual performance and psychology
of the elderly. Optik (Stuttgart), 203, 164063.
Wolffsohn, J. S., & Davies, L. N. (2019). Presbyopia: Effectiveness of correction strategies. Progress in
Retinal and Eye Research, 68, 124–143.
Woo, Y. S., Shin, G. I., & Park, H. Y. (2020). Comparative Analysis of Differences in Reaction Time
and Divided Attention with Elderly Age: Using the Driving Ability Assessment Tool. Therapeutic Science
for Rehabilitation, 9(3), 53–61.
135
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
ADDITIONAL READING
Ambrens, M., Tiedemann, A., Delbaere, K., Alley, S., & Vandelanotte, C. (2020). The effect of eHealthbased
falls prevention programmes on balance in people aged 65 years and over living in the community:
Protocol for a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open, 10(1), e031200. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2019-031200 PMID:31948985
Bjerk, M., Brovold, T., Skelton, D. A., & Bergland, A. (2017). A falls prevention programme to improve
quality of life, physical function and falls efficacy in older people receiving home help services: Study
protocol for a randomised controlled trial. BMC Health Services Research, 17(1), 559. doi:10.118612913-
017-2516-5 PMID:28806904
Davis, J. C., Bryan, S., Best, J. R., Li, L. C., Hsu, C. L., Gomez, C., Vertes, K. A., & Liu-Ambrose,
T. (2015). Mobility predicts change in older adults’ health-related quality of life: Evidence from a
Vancouver falls prevention prospective cohort study. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 13(1), 101.
doi:10.118612955-015-0299-0 PMID:26168922
Dreinhöfer, K. E., Mitchell, P. J., Bégué, T., Cooper, C., Costa, M. L., Falaschi, P., Hertz, K., Marsh, D.,
Maggi, S., Nana, A., Palm, H., Speerin, R., & Magaziner, J. (2018). A global call to action to improve
the care of people with fragility fractures. Injury, 49(8), 1393–1397. doi:10.1016/j.injury.2018.06.032
PMID:29983172
Growdon, M. E., Shorr, R. I., & Inouye, S. K. (2017). The tension between promoting mobility and
preventing falls in the hospital. JAMA Internal Medicine, 177(6), 759–760. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.
2017.0840 PMID:28437517
Naseri, C., McPhail, S. M., Haines, T. P., Morris, M. E., Shorr, R., Etherton‐Beer, C., Netto, J., Flicker,
L., Bulsara, M., Lee, D.-C. A., Francis-Coad, J., Waldron, N., Boudville, A., & Hill, A. M. (2020). Perspectives
of older adults regarding barriers and enablers to engaging in fall prevention activities after
hospital discharge. Health & Social Care in the Community, 28(5), 1710–1722. doi:10.1111/hsc.12996
PMID:32337796
Zanker, J., & Duque, G. (2020). Approaches for Falls Prevention in Hospitals and Nursing Home Settings.
In Falls and Cognition in Older Persons (pp. 245–259). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-24233-6_14
136
Ambulatory Wellbeing
﻿
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Ageing: Ageing is the process of becoming older, which is characterised by a process of natural
senescence in older adults.
Ambulation: Ambulation is the act, action, or an instance of moving about or walking.
Deterioration: This is the process of degenerating or becoming progressively worse.
Gerontology: This is the science and comprehensive multidisciplinary study of aging and older adults.
Morbidity: The term used to describe suffering from a disease or medical condition.
Mortality: This is the state of being subject to death.
Outcomes: The outcome of a phenomena is the way something turns out or the active consequence
of something.
Physiology: The specific branch of biological sciences that deals with the normal functions of living
organisms and their parts.
Polypharmacy: Polypharmacy can be defined as the concomitant use of five or more medications
per 24-hour period by any individual person.
Psychology: Pertains to the mental factors governing a specific situation or process.
137
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 9
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch009
ABSTRACT
Falls can have harmful physical and psychosocial consequences that affect the activity, socialization,
and quality of life of older adults. Falls prevention education (FPE) is critical to prevent falls among
older people. FPE is required for all key stakeholders, including older people health care professionals
and students, as well as other professionals who work with or offer services for older people. This is
especially important to ensure the quality of services in health care sector in home services, hospitals,
and residential settings. The FPE contents are extensive and need to be tailored to who is being trained
and where. FPE is important because it informs prevention and management, hence supports older
people with and without injuries to have an active and healthy life. There is extensive evidence-based to
support FPE and well-functioning educational models to use this work. FPE pay dividends for people,
society, and the economy.
Preventing Falls:
Emphasizing Education to Support
Older Person Active Ageing
Marja Äijö
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9325-6966
Savonia University of Applied Sciences, Kuopio, Finland
Amanda M. Clifford
Ageing Research Centre, Health Research Institute, University of Limerick, Ireland
Irene O’Byrne Maguire
National Treasury Management Agency, Ireland
138
Preventing Falls
﻿
INTRODUCTION
Globally, the population is ageing leading to significant challenges for healthcare provision (Chatterji,
Byles, Cutler, Seeman, & Verdes, 2015; GBD, 2019, 2020; WHO, 2015). The risk of falling increases
with age, with one in three older persons over the age of 65 years falling each year (Ganz & Latham,
2020; James, 2020; Wang, et al., 2021: WHO, 2021). Falls can result in negative physical, psychological
and social consequences, including fractures, fear of falling and reduced self-efficacy. The confluence of
these sequela can lead to activity avoidance resulting in insufficient levels of physical activity, increase
in daily sedentary time and decrease in functional capacity. Thus, along with the typical musculoskeletal
and neurophysiological changes associated with ageing, the added consequences of falls can increase
the risk of future falls. Thus, given population changes and the negative impact of falls there is a timely
need to educate people about steps that can be taken to prevent falls.
A wide range of professionals from different fields are needed to support active and successful ageing
strategies for older persons. Their role is to develop and implement evidence-based services for all older
adults. To best respond to the needs of all older adults, a person-centred approach, involving multi/interprofessional
cooperation and education, are needed. Hence, individualised tailored solutions are needed
to prevent, treat, care, and rehabilitate older adults so that they can live independently in their own homes
or live as they wish in residential settings. Students studying in the disciplines of health and social care
and healthcare professionals acquire, deepen, and expand their skills and knowledge through education
to meet the needs of older persons in the best possible way. In addition, older persons themselves need
education to increase their knowledge to prevent harmful falls.
The aim of this chapter is to describe to the reader, the role of education in falls prevention among
older persons and health care professionals, and the importance of continuous education support to ensure
health care professionals’ have the competencies and skills to implement effective falls prevention
strategies for older persons. This chapter describes to the reader the teaching approach of falls prevention
using five W’s: Who-Where-What-Why-HoW. In addition, this chapter will describe a number of
system level examples from the field that are focussed on preventing harmful falls among older persons.
BACKGROUND TO THE PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH FALLS AND AGEING
Older persons are more susceptible to fatal falls and other serious consequences, such as wrist and hip
fractures (Vieira, Palmer & Chaves, 2016; Ye et al., 2021; WHO, 2021). Worldwide, falls are the second
leading cause of unintentional injury deaths. Globally each year, more than 37 million severe falls occur
that warrant medical attention and approximately 684 000 people die from falls (WHO, 2021). Older
adults are at greater risk of falling, tripping, or slipping when balance and muscle strength decrease.
Changes in functional capacity can make it more difficult for older adults to move around their living
environment, both inside their home and outside in the community. Also, activities of day life can become
increasingly more difficult for older adults due to a gradual change in physical, psychological, cognitive
function, and socialisation. In addition,, a significant proportion of older adults have a chronic condition
and or a chronic long-term disease, which can further increase a person’s risk of falling, either due to the
effects of the disease or secondary consequences for example side effects of medication.
It is essential that evidence-informed falls prevention education programmes consider context and
thus the indirect consequences of the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic. For some time now the world has
139
Preventing Falls
﻿
been experiencing the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic, which has and continues to have an inordinate
effect on health, wellbeing, and socialisation of older adults worldwide. In earlier phases of the pandemic
and subsequently during an increase in the incidence of COVID-19, older adults were advised to avoid
non-essential contact and follow social distancing measures. These measures changed access to social,
environmental, and healthcare supports potentially affecting physical, psychological, and mental health
of older adults. The impact is evidenced in the findings from the Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing
(TILDA) (Ward, O’Mahoney, & Kenny 2021b), which included 4,000 participants aged 60 years and
older living in Ireland. The majority of participants reported that they did not travel to visit family
members (62%) or friends (80%) and almost one quarter (22%) did not meet minimum recommended
levels of physical activity during the COVID-19 pandemic. Restrictions in social and physical activity
can result in feeling lonely and socially isolated and can also contribute to harmful falls. The Cacioppo
Evolutionary Theory of Loneliness (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018) proposes that the loss in social connectivity
may lead to physiological and behavioral changes, which can contribute to a deterioration in
physical and cognitive health. In the United States, Hoffman et al. (2022) reported that the pandemic
resulted in a significant deterioration in physical function and activity among older adults. Additionally,
they identified a relationship between social isolation and poorer physical function and fall-related
outcomes, including falls risk and fear of falling. Hence, in addition to typical changes that can occur
with ageing, the pandemic had a significant detrimental effect on physical and psychosocial health of
older adults, which requires consideration when designing the content and delivery of FPE and falls
prevention programmes.
Guidelines, Recommendation and Toolkits
When constructing the content of a falls prevention education programme it is important to incorporate
current evidence-based falls prevention and management guidelines and recommendations. A plethora of
national and international guidelines, recommendations and toolkits have been published on the prevention
and management of falls among older adults. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) published the findings from its surveillance review of the evidence supporting its guidelines on
falls from 2013 supporting the need to update its guidelines (NICE, 2019). Subsequently, more recent
evidence acknowledged discrepancies in existing practice guidelines (Montero-Odasso et al., 2021),
which prompted the development of the recently published world guidelines for falls prevention and
management for older adults (Montero-Odasso et al., 2022). These guidelines used the modified GRADE
system to evaluate the strength of each and quality of evidence supporting each recommendation. These
global guidelines provide key evidence-based recommendations whilst also recognising that tailoring
may be required to translate recommendations to differing national contexts.
National examples include an updated version of the evidence-based recommendation on the prevention
of falls and fall-related injuries in 2017 published by the Finnish Association of Physiotherapists
(The Finnish Association of Physiotherapists, 2017). Additionally, in Finland, the Finish Institute for
Health and Welfare published the IKINÄ-model and guidebook, based on international guidelines (Panel
on Prevention of Falls in Older Persons, American Geriatrics Society and British Geriatrics Society,
2011), on how to prevent falls among older persons (Pajala, 2012). The aim of the guideline was to
offer professionals tools to use to prevention falls, harmonise practices in the field and provide useful
tools for students to learn about fall prevention strategies. The guideline is based on research evidence
and enriched with practical instructions and tools for implementing fall prevention in different kinds
140
Preventing Falls
﻿
of environments where older persons are living. Tools include how to assess fall risk as well as general
and specific fall risk factors. In addition, in Finland interprofessional collaboration between different
organizations, evidence-based falls risk assessment tools, falls prevention programmes, and materials
advising older adults on how to prevent falls are used to prevent harmful falls and rehabilitate people
following a fall. Older persons, healthcare and educational organisations use these methods and materials
to educate professionals and students about falls prevention. (Äijö et al., 2021a; Äijö et al., 2021b.)
In Ireland, the Health Service Executive published the Strategy to Prevent Falls and Fractures in
Ireland’s Ageing Population in 2008 (Health Service Executive, 2008). Following this, project AFFINITY
(Activating falls and fracture prevention in Ireland together) was set-up to increase awareness and
to empower older persons, communities and health and social care providers to work together to reduce
the risk and rate of falling, the severity of injuries, and to promote the best possible outcomes for people
following a falls-related injury. The AFFINITY project is a collaboration between the Health Service
Executive and the State Claims Agency and works in partnership with older persons’ advocacy groups
such as Age Friendly Ireland and Age and Opportunity. The aim is to develop a comprehensive falls and
fracture prevention system that is person-centered by bringing together and integrating primary prevention,
secondary prevention, and rehabilitation as well as measuring outcomes collectively (AFFINITY,
2022). The Irish AFFINITY project built on the good work of many countries, in particular Scotland
and New Zealand. Scotland’s falls and fragility fracture prevention programme is within the national
Active and Independent Living Programme (https://www.gov.scot/publications/allied-health-professionsco-
creating-wellbeing-people-scotland-active-independent/pages/4/), and its recently updated falls
and fracture prevention strategy: https://www.gov.scot/publications/national-falls-fracture-preventionstrategy-
scotland-2019-2024/pages/6/New Zealand Health Quality & Safety Commission, recently
published Reducing harm from falls: Recommended evidence-based resources 2020, which contains
clinical guidelines, systematic reviews of the literature, resources, links, toolkits and guidance for key
stakeholders involved in falls prevention (Health Quality & Safety Commission New Zealand 2020).
To support Primary Care Teams, they also developed the Stay Independent Falls Prevention Toolkit
based on the STEADI falls campaign developed by the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). It included guidance on the assessment and practical management of falls risk (Best
Practice Advocacy Centre New Zealand, 2022).
Other examples include the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care (ACSQHC)
produced three separate falls guideline documents on the prevention of falls and harm from falls in
older people in the community, hospitals, and residential care facilities. Thus, acknowledging both the
commonalities and setting specific information required to prevent falls in the three main settings. In
addition, ACSQHC published useful, user-friendly factsheets (Falls Facts) for various stakeholders
including healthcare workers and hospital staff. At European level initiatives such as the Prevention of
Falls Network for Dissemination (ProFouND, 2015), was established to increase awareness about falls
and falls prevention programmes, by disseminating evidence-based resources to support implementation
of best practice across Europe among key stakeholders in policy and practice.
Fall prevention education (FPE) is one of the strategies used to reduce falls among older adults
(WHO 2021). However, globally a uniform education design for health care professionals’ education
in FPE does not exist (Shaw et al., 2020). Education has been delivered as either a single or part of a
multifactorial intervention in many fall preventions programmes (Cameron et al. 2018). Most of these
programmes have been developed to target the hospital environment and patients there (Heng et al. 2020;
141
Preventing Falls
﻿
Lee, Pritchard, McDermott & Haines, 2014) or people who work or live-in residential care (Schoberer,
Eglseer, Halfens & Lohrmann, 2018; Taylor, 2015).
The basic idea of education is to share and increase the level of knowledge and skills among learners.
Stimulating intellectual curiosity, creativity and critical thinking requires innovative and versatile
pedagogical solutions. Integration of different teaching and learning methods can motivate learners to
develop their skills and enrich learners’ attitudes, beliefs, and assumptions (Gill et al., 2019; Shaw et al.,
2020; Tiedemann et al., 2021). In addition, older persons require tailored education to meet their needs
to prevent falls. Education can be implemented in different environments using a variety of methods, for
example the hospital environment (Shaw et al. 2023) or community-based setting.
Education is a component of the clinical practice guidelines on fall prevention. Based on the Montero-
Odasso et al. (2021) evaluation of fall prevention clinical practice guidelines, fifteen guidelines recommended
falls prevention education, of these six guidelines provided strong recommendations and six
provided weak recommendations for offering patients and caregivers education on fall prevention and
management strategies. Thus, Montero-Odasso et al. (2021) systematic review reported that agreement
was high for many recommendations among fall prevention clinical practice guidelines for older adults.
However, key aspects such as including stakeholder perspectives were lacking. Thus, it is recommended
that future guidelines include patient values and perspectives, which are a cornerstone of evidence-based
practice and essential to effective implementation and uptake.
WHO-WHERE-WHAT-WHY-HOW IN FALL PREVENTION AND EDUCATION
Cooperation between European partners within the European Partnership for Active and Healthy Ageing
(EIP AHA) (EIP AHA A2, 2021; Bousquet et al., 2017), a programme of the European Commission,
aimed to enhance and enrich the underlying information and process care models for older persons to
support the embedding of good practices and their upscaling. Many examples of innovative, cross-sectoral
programmes and practices were shared on how to improve older persons’ quality of life and enhance the
efficiency and sustainability of health and social care systems.
Personalised and population-based assessments underpin care models for older persons and appear
in many forms. A lreadyliz assessment refers to the monitoring and functioning of an individual’s health
conditions to determine suitable and timely prevention and intervention strategies, an example being
the Common Geriatric Assessment (CGA) (Welsh et al., 2014; Burns et al., 2004). Population-based
assessments relate to the health economic assessment of practices and systems in terms of outcomes,
such as the Monitoring and Assessment Framework for the European Innovation Partnership on Active
and Healthy Ageing (Boehler & Abadie, 2015; EIP AHA A2, 2021).
The important distinctions between these two modes of assessment are outlined in Eklund (2021),
in which he argues for the development of a common assessment framework for active and health ageing
capable of providing granular context and culture specific information and process structures; The
latter needs to be done in collaboration with multi-actors, such as services users, multi-professionals,
agencies and cross-sectoral. The proposed framework is based on the WHO’s (World Health Organisation)
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) (n.d.) REF and the CGA
mentioned above and is outlined in figure 1.
142
Preventing Falls
﻿
The proposed CAFAHA groups the social assessment of older persons into the following categories:
Activity, Capability, Inclusion, Attitude, Mood, Circumstances and Family, while the health assessment
focusses on such categories as: Cerebration, Memory, Behaviour, Stress, Sleep, Pain, Nutrition, with
specific assessments needed pending context and culture. The EIP AHA Action Group 2 falls prevention
(EIP on AHA achievements: Action group A2 – Falls prevention, n.d.) proposed information and process
model of lreadyliz conditions and functioning within active and healthy ageing requires an understanding
of the WHO-WHERE-WHAT-WHY-HOW to work with context and culture. Many different categories
of professionals and students (WHO) are interacting, alongside the service user and informal carers, at
variou– locations (WHERE), that serve as older persons’ home as well as care settings/points-of-care.
Various forms of assessments (WHAT) are required at points-of-service, sometimes specific assessments
like those for fall and injury risk, sometimes more general quality of life-oriented assessments, sometimes
specific assessments related to cognitive capacity. Assessments are typically performed prior to decisions
about care levels, which in turn is based on criteria, underlying circumstances, and motivations (WHY),
and related objectives. Once a need for care has been lreadyl, implementation of care is based on good
practices, recommendations, and guidelines (HOW).
WHO: Older Persons Together and with Professionals
Working with Older Persons
In order for falls prevention education to be successful it is essential to include older persons together
with their loved ones for example spouse, children, grandchildren, relatives and neighbours and friends
who live nearby. In addition, it is important to educate the wider community of people that encounter
older adults for example, during visits to the store, riding the bus or participating in an exercise group.
Figure 1. Proposed Common Assessment Framework for Active and Healthy Ageing (CAFAHA) to foster
innovation in lreadyliz health management
143
Preventing Falls
﻿
In all these situations, the older person works, meets, and talks with other people. From a fall prevention
perspective, it is important that all people who work and meet older persons have some knowledge and
skills to prevent falls. Relatives and loved ones have a key role to play as caregivers when they support
older persons’ independent living. It is important that these carers are included in any local and national
education campaigns on fall prevention.
From the traditional perspective, the stakeholders who work with older adults are typically healthcare
professionals classified based on their education, specialty, and experience. There is no unique or allencompassing
international classification of healthcare professionals. This explains, in part, why education
programmes are not internationally lreadyl for all healthcare professionals. Additionally, countries differ
in the lreadyliz and structure of their health and social care systems. In health care sectors, workers are
for example nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, social workers, medical doctors, and other
health care professionals. Their role is based on their education, professional competencies, and remit
within each setting. Another important professional group are physical activity and exercise instructors
who deliver group-based exercise classes in the community based settings.
In the wider context the “who” question is important. It is not such the social and health care professionals
but also all people in society. In the basic planning of the entire society, the design of infrastructure
and services should consider services that are suitable for everyone, including older persons. For
example, architects whose plan living environments and the buildings so that they are accessible, and
they support participation. An accessible environment also provides a safe environment for movement
and prevents falls. At the same time, it enables and even empowers the older person to live an active
life. In summary, many professional from different field need some education to fall prevention. One
important question is who can be educator and who can educate whom?
WHERE do We Need to Educate About Falls Prevention?
Educational information needs to be there where older persons live their active lives and where they
used services. It is in different kind of places and contents in community, city, state and globally. Figure
2. illustrates the different groups of people who need education in fall prevention based on where
older persons live and use services. All older persons should be advised on falls prevention and given
knowledge and information on how to prevent falls. For example, community-based care is provided in
the community or in a person’s own home, hospital care in acute settings or care in supported longer
stay settings. An accessible home environment is essential wherever a person lives to support active
independent living without falls.
144
Preventing Falls
﻿
Different prevention strategies are required depending upon an older person’s risk of falls. In all
cases, older persons need to be informed about self-management strategies including on how they can
prevent falls in their living environment. For example, by changing one’s own behaviour, changing the
interior of the home, or increasing the accessibility of the home. In hospital acute care environment fall
prevention is an important part of care and rehabilitation as the person is unwell and the environment is
unfamiliar. In care homes, when older person is unable to live independently, falls prevention is similarly
important to note. For example, older people with cognitive decline, stroke or frailty need a safe
environment in which to live and move.
WHAT Do We Need to Include?
Information, knowledge, and skills should be tailored to whom the education is being provided to and
in what context. This means that the content and delivery should be lreadylized to meet the specific
needs of the individual or group. In this section, the main categories of what should be included for
older persons, health care professionals and students are listed. The following information based on
the guidelines, recommendations, and good practices (Panel on Prevention of Falls in Older Persons,
American Geriatrics Society and British Geriatrics Society, 2011; Pajala, 2012, The Finnish Association
of Physiotherapists, 2017; Health Quality & Safety Commission New Zealand, 2020; Montero-Odasso
et al., 2022; AFFINITY, 2022).
For older persons themselves the following information is important to include information on:
Figure 2. Groups who need falls prevention education based on where older person live and use services
145
Preventing Falls
﻿
• physical activity programmes to maintain and improve balance, muscle strength and flexibility
• instructions for physical activity that can provide optimum bone loading to lready bone health
• safe living environment at home (inside and outside)
• good nutrition, vitamin D
• use of alcohol
• preventing slips: footwear and anti-slip
• safe pedestrian crossing in winter
• mobility aids
• hip protectors
• security technology
• self-assessment measures of performance such as fear of falls or fall risk assessment.
Health care professionals and health care students should know how to prevent, manage and rehabilitate
following falls. In addition to this they should know.
• up to date evidence-based practice to prevent falls
• international and national guidelines and recommendations relate to falls prevention
• International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and how to use that to
describe the medical condition and functioning capacity of the older person
• to understand and be able to perform a comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA)
• typical acute and chronic diseases (ICD-10), treatment, rehabilitation, and medication for these
diseases
• drug side effects
• etiology of falls (intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors)
• typical injury of older people and treatment and rehabilitation of these injuries
• assessment tools to evaluate functional ability, all dimensions:
◦◦ physical
◦◦ psychological
◦◦ social
◦◦ cognitive
◦◦ activities of daily living
◦◦ fear of falling
• how to motivate older people for example to maintain function and keep physically active
• International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI) to plan good and individualise intervention
to prevent falls.
WHY Do We Educate About Fall Prevention?
Why is education on fall prevention so important? This can be examined from two perspectives; these
are individual and society perspectives. First, all individuals deserve to live in an environment that is
safe and enables active living without the risk of fall. Secondly, people have the right to receive help
and services when they need them for health or some other reason. Society must offer these services
flexibly to everyone.
146
Preventing Falls
﻿
From the older person’s perspective, the main aim is to prevent falls and consequences of falls. For
the older person this means:
• quality of life
• active life
• healthy life
• support possibilities to live at home environment
• skills and knowledge to keep up his/her functional ability in all functional dimension, physical,
social, cognitive, psychological and activities of daily living
• willingness to accept guidance and counselling and use it to promote his/her own health and
well-being
• willingness to accept aids
• home renovations and money pay at least your share of the cost
• prevention from the human suffering that are consequences of falls
• willingness to participate in a fall’s prevention interventions.
From society perspective the main aim is support older person active and healthy life. For the society
this means:expenses to produce primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention services
• savings when falls do not occur, and people do not need services
• requires knowledge and skills of fall prevention
• positive attitude
• know-how to produce and offer falls prevention interventions
• understanding of ageing.
These aspects are related to policies and strategies adopted in regions and countries and are often
connected with political ingrediencies.
HOW Do We Educate to Prevent Falls?
How we implement fall prevention educations? Around the world in different institutions have their
own methods and protocols to do FPE. Often the same pedagogical methods and good practices work
with health care professionals and students. In this section we describe few examples how to teach fall
prevention to the health care students and professionals and older persons.
In higher education institutions, among health and social care student’s education have used different
kind of pedagogical solutions and methods to teach falls prevention (Äijö, 2019a) and new ideas for the
educational programmes have present (Äijö et al., 2021a). Education also varies from non-professional
teaching to multi-professional teaching. Savonia University Applied Sciences have developed falls prevention
education and teaching. The figure 3. describing the integrative model of FPE. This model included
in the continuum from theoretical studies to the clinical practice describing the teaching methods. This
model has been studied during 2015-2018 in Savonia UAS and the results are describing more deeply
below lready.
147
Preventing Falls
﻿
Among health care students, theoretical knowledge forms the basic understanding in teaching and
learning on falls prevention. At the beginning of the FPE, it is good to examine the students’ knowledge
of fall prevention. For example, Äijö et al. (2019b) study results showed that nursing students had lot
of theoretical knowledge concerning fall risk factors and fall prevention at the beginning of the specific
course related to gerontological nursing. The third study year students have had many other theoretical
courses and clinical practices before that FPE, and they have learned to reflect their learning experiences.
It is recommended to consider this competence when planning the content and methods of the
FPE for the students.
For the health care professionals education workshops have significantly improved participants’
knowledge, confidence and behaviour regarding fall prevention exercise prescription (Tiedemann et
al., 2021). In addition, an interactive education workshop on how to use a new evidence-based hospital
falls screening tool to help decrees the falls risk, supports the use of evidence-based services and implementation
of clinical guidelines (Shaw, Kiegaldie & Morris, 2021a). Among health care professionals
a high-quality education programmes grounded in a rigorous quality framework improved participants’
knowledge regarding evidence-based falls prevention and use of evidence-based rationales for behaviour
change promotes effective learning (Shaw, Kiegaldie, Jones, & Morris, 2021b).
Interprofessional Learning
It is evident that falls are complex, and a multidisciplinary approach is required to successfully prevent
and manage falls holistically. Hence, when educating students undertaking a professional qualification
in allied health, nursing and medicine, interprofessional learning and case-based approaches can be used
to facilitate collaborative learning leading to improved interdisciplinary communication, teamwork and
patient care (O’Leary et al., 2020).
Figure 3. Integrative model of FPE in Savonia University of Applied Sciences (Äijö 2019a)
148
Preventing Falls
﻿
Interprofessional Education (IPE) can occur in a variety of settings for example in a classroom at
university, simulated environment, or while on practice placement in the clinical setting (O’Leary et
al., 2020). Interprofessional teaching integrates teaching methods, teaching contents and students from
two or more disciplines together. In nursing education, it has been found that learning-oriented and participatory
pedagogy, which integrates different teaching methods, increased students’ accountability for
their own learning and created optimum conditions for lifelong learning (Reyes et al., 2018). By using
varied teaching methods, it is also possible to strengthen and deepen students’ learning of theoretical
knowledge in a certain teaching content, for example in the prevention of falls. An interprofessional
educational model by Brown et al. (2018) included five teaching steps: 1. online didactic content delivery,
2. poster-based skills practice, 3 interprofessional team simulation, 4. patient assessment and 5. expert
team feedback. The steps included both uniprofessional and interprofessional teaching and learning. The
learning experience based on the interprofessional education model by Brown et al. (2018) lead to a
positive outcome among students from different health and social care fields in geriatric falls assessment
and prevention. It also resulted in an increase in positive attitude regarding interprofessional team-based
care and satisfaction with learning.
A variety of pedagogical concepts and learning methods can be used to teach and learn about falls
and falls prevention including case-based learning, simulation based training or patient scenarios in
practice. Indeed, research has identified that case-based approaches can be a more effective teaching
method to improve student’s ability to problem solve compared to traditional methods of teaching and
learning (Bi et al., 2019). Simulated learning environments and skills labs are thought to promote students
integrative learning as they engage in experiences that merge theoretical knowledge, practical
skills and interdisciplinary team working. Simulation based training can range from using trained actors
with scripted clinical scenarios to represent a standardised patient to realistic life-sized computerised
manikins (Acosta et al., 2022). Recently, Acosta et al. (2022) found that simulation-based training for
fall prevention was both valuable and well received by most frontline nursing home staff. Similarly,
Silén-Lipponen et al. (2019) showed that a full-scale fall prevention simulation scenario helped nursing
students apply theoretical knowledge about fall prevention in authentic simulations. In addition, they
found that students learned to analyse the client’s physical capacity, provide advice, respect the client’s
autonomy and evaluate the client’s mental capacity. Simulation was also shown to help students extend
their knowledge-based competence and develop their professional identity formation (Feldman et al.,
2022; Torkshavand, Khatiban & Soltanian, 2020). In addition, simulation appeared to be equally as
good when compared to written falls prevention education among older adults at hospital environment.
(DeWalt et al., 2023).
Practice placement are important learning environments for students. For example, Turjamaa et al.
(2020) study showed that nursing students experiences of falls and fall prevention were based on their
experiences when working in that setting. Fall prevention during home visits included fall prevention in
authentic client situations, confidential relationships with older clients, and evidence-based knowledge.
Students were educated on fall prevention, however, the evaluation of nutrition and adverse drug effects
seemed to be ignored. In addition, they felt that there was a lack of comprehensive evaluation and
understanding of the meaning of psychological factors, such as fear of falling. Thus, it is imperative that
education programmes are holistic and include information and strategies to target all aspects.
Practice placement or clinical hours typically account for a significant proportion of a students’ professional
qualification programme. Interprofessional practice placements (IPP), which are endorsed by the
World Health Organization (2010), are a key component of IPE. Interprofessional practice placements
149
Preventing Falls
﻿
are when students from two or more professions work together at a practice placement site to provide
patient care. IPP can provide an authentic opportunity for students to work together and translate their
knowledge and skills from the classroom environment to practice settings (O’Leary et al., 2020). Fall
prevention IPE activities can be used to inform older adults, students, and healthcare professionals about
falls prevention and management following a fall. Research identified that an IPE activity using the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths & Injuries (STEADI)
initiative was an effective framework and resource for fall prevention IPE activities (Taylor et al., 2019).
In comparison, research identified that a 1-hour education session was insufficient to empower qualified
health care professionals (HCPs) implement the Safe Recovery Programme. Hence, in order for IPE to
be successful and meet the needs of participants the authors recommend that education providers engage
with participants in advance to identify training needs and provide sufficient opportunities for feedback
and discussion during the application phase with patients (Shaw et al., 2023).
Meaningful education should be offered to all older persons. For example, the Irish AFFINITY (2019)
project delivered a symposium which included members of Age Friendly Ireland and Older People’s
Councils who co-designed and delivered an interactive workshop on Independent Living and Community
Supports. This workshop included such topics as: Wellbeing Wednesdays, Falls and Injury Prevention
practices, and establishing interagency Otago strength and balance exercise programmes. The workshop
slides and other materials from this event are available in website of AFFINITY (2019). The workshop
testifies to the importance of ensuring that older persons and their careers are enabled to co-create and
prioritise what matters to them in ageing well.
Falls prevention education should be recommended for older adults during and after hospitalizsation
included in intensive face-to-face patient education with multimedia materials (Lee, Pritchard, McDermott
& Haines 2014). In addition, good results were achieved when residents’ brochures included clear
information on avoiding external risks as well as coping strategies after a fall event have been used with
residents and family members (Schoberer, Eglseer, Halfens, & Lohrmann, 2018). Possible barriers for
example time constraints, limited interprofessional collaboration, and a lack of staff input into do fall
prevention work should be solved so that health care professionals can play a key role in delivering
evidence-based falls prevention education in hospitals (Heng et al. 2022a; Heng et al., 2022b).
CONCLUSION
This chapter summarised the need of FPE. A lot of evidence exists to support the content and delivery
of FPE programmes. Still more work is needed to actualise these programmes at all levels and in all
situations where we work with older persons. Professionals’ key role is to use and share evidence-based
knowledge about falls and falls prevention with older persons and use appropriate FPE methods. This
means taking an evidence-based approach by incorporating the best available evidence with practice
expertise, values and perspectives of older adults and context. Professionals need education so that they
can educate older people. But this is not enough. In the bigger picture, we should develop society and
healthcare system that is age-friendly, and where changes due to ageing are taken into account. In this
way, the structures and services would support older adults participating in society holistically: physically,
psychologically, and socially. This development includes a fall prevention perspective. Through
this, we can develop society, services, and education to successful prevent falls in older persons.
150
Preventing Falls
﻿
REFERENCES
.Acosta, D.J., Rinfret, A., Plant, J. & Hsu, A.T. (2022). Using Patient Simulation to Promote Best Practices
in Fall Prevention and Postfall Assessment in Nursing Homes. Journal of Nursing Care Quality,
37(2), 117-122. . doi:10.1097/NCQ.0000000000000599
AFFINITY. (2019). AFFINITY National Falls and Bone Health Symposium 2019. Health Service
Executive. https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/olderpeople/falls-prevention-and-bone-health/events/
AFFINITY. (2022). About AFFINITY National Falls and bone health project 2018-2023. Health Service
Executive. https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/olderpeople/falls-prevention-and-bone-health/
Äijö, M. (2019a). Hyviä pedagogisia ratkaisuja kaatumisten ehkäisyn opetukseen. AKESO-tutkimus ja
kehittämishanke. Savonia-ammattikorkeakoulu julkaisusarja 4. Savonia-ammattikorkeakoulu. Saatavissa.,
https://www.theseus.fi/handle/10024/186053
Äijö, M., Abreu, C da CF., & Goswami, N. (2021a). Fall Prevention Education: Good Examples From
Higher Education. In the book Eklund P (editor). Integrated Care and Fall Prevention in Active and
Healthy Aging, 171-181. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch009
Äijö, M., Havulinna, S., Karinkanta, S., Tervo-Heikkinen, T., & Lönnroos, E. (2021b). Fall Prevention
in Education and Training of Healthcare Students, Professionals, and Non-Professionals. In the book
Eklund P. (editor) Integrated Care and Fall Prevention in Active and Healthy Aging, 157-170. IGI Global.
doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch008
Äijö, M., Silén-Lipponen, M., Turjamaa, R., & Tervo-Heikkinen, T. (2019b). Health care students
theoretical understanding in fall prevention among older people. EAPRIL 2018 Conference Proceedings,
Portorož, Slovenia. https://www.eapril.org/sites/default/files/2019-03/Proceedings%202018%20
publication.pdf
Best Practice Advocacy Centre New Zealand. (2022). Stay Independent Falls Prevention Toolkit. BPAC.
https://bpac.org.nz/falls/
Bi, M., Zhao, Z., Yang, J., & Wang, Y. (2019). Comparison of case-based learning and traditional method
in teaching postgraduate students of medical oncology. Medical Teacher, 41(10), 1124–1128. doi:10.1
080/0142159X.2019.1617414 PMID:31215320
Boehler, C. & Abadie, F. (2015). Monitoring and Assessment Framework for the European Innovation
Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing (MAFEIP). Conceptual description of the Monitoring and
Assessment Framework for the EIP on AHA. Publications Office of the European Union.
Bousquet, J., Bewick, M., Cano, A., Eklund, P., Fico, G., Goswami, N., et al. (2017). Building Bridges
for Innovation in Ageing: Synergies between Action Groups of the EIP on AHA. The journal of nutrition,
health & ageing, 21(1), 92–104. doi:10.1007/s12603-016-0803-1
151
Preventing Falls
﻿
Brown, D.K., Fosnight, S., Whitford, M., Hazelett, S., Mcquown, C., Drost, J.C., et al. (2018). Interprofessional
education model for geriatric falls risk assessment and prevention. BMJ Open Quality, 7(4),
e000417. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2018-000417
Burns, A., Lawlor, B., & Craig, S. (2004). Assessment Scales in Old Age Psychiatry (2nd ed.). Martin
Dunitz.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Cacioppo, S. (2018). Loneliness in the Modern Age: An Evolutionary Theory of Loneliness
(ETL). Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 58, 127–197. doi:10.1016/bs.aesp.2018.03.003
Cameron, I. D., Dyer, S. M., Panagoda, C. E., Murray, G. R., Hill, K. D., Cumming, R. G., & Kerse, N.
(2018). Interventions for preventing falls in older people in care facilities and hospitals. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, 9(1), CD005465. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005465.pub4 PMID:30191554
Chatterji, S., Byles, J., Cutler, D., Seeman, T., & Verdes, E. (2015). Health, functioning, and disability in
older adults—Present status and future implications. Lancet, 385(9967), 563–575. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(14)61462-8 PMID:25468158
DeWalt, N. C., Stahorsky, K. A., Sturges, S., Bena, J. F., Morrison, S. L., Drobnich Sulak, L., Szczepinski,
L., & Albert, N. M. (2023). Simulation Versus Written Fall Prevention Education in Older
Hospitalized Adults: A Randomized Controlled Study. Clinical Nursing Research, 32(2), 278–287.
doi:10.1177/10547738221082192 PMID:35291853
Eklund, P. (2021). Integrated Care in Prevention: Maturity and Upscaling. In the book Eklund P.
(editor) Integrated Care and Fall Prevention in Active and Healthy Ageing, pp. 250-262. IGI Global.
doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch014
Feldman, M., Edwards, C., Wong, A., Randolph, J., Woleben, C., Nguyen, A., & ... . (2022). The Role
for Simulation in Professional Identity Formation in Medical Students. Simulation in Healthcare, 17(1),
e8–e13. doi:10.1097/SIH.0000000000000583
Ganz, D. A., & Latham, N. K. (2020). Prevention of falls in community dwelling older adults. The New
England Journal of Medicine, 382, 734–743.
GBD. (2019). Diseases and Injuries Collaborators Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204
countries and territories, 1990–2019: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2019. Lancet, 396, 1204–1222.
Gill, M., Andersen, E., & Hilsmann, N. (2019). Best practices for teaching pharmacology to undergraduate
nursing students: A systematic review of the literature. Nurse Education Today, 74, 15–24.
Health Navigator. (2022). Preventing falls. Health Navigator. https://www.healthnavigator.org.nz/healtha-
z/f/falls-and-falls-prevention/
152
Preventing Falls
﻿
Health Quality & Safety Commission New Zealand. (2020). Reducing harm from falls: Recommended
evidence-based resources 2020. Health Quality & Safety Commission. https://www.hqsc.govt.nz/assets/
Our-work/System-safety/Reducing-harm/Falls/Publications-resources/Reducing_harm_from_falls_recommended_
evidence-based_resources_2020.pdf
Health Service Executive. (2008). Strategy to Prevent Falls and Fractures in Ireland’s Ageing Population.
Health Service Executive. https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/olderpeople/strategy-to-preventfalls-
and-fractures-in-irelands-ageing-population.html
Heng, H., Jazayeri, D., Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., Hill, A.-M., & Morris, M. E. (2020). Hospital falls
prevention with patient education: A scoping review. BMC Geriatrics, 20(1), 140. doi:10.118612877-
020-01515-w
Heng, H., Kiegaldie, D., Shaw, L., Jazayeri, D., Hill, A.M. & Morris, M.E. (2022a). Implementing Patient
Falls Education in Hospitals: A Mixed-Methods Trial. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 10(7):1298. doi:.
doi:10.3390/healthcare10071298
Heng, H., Kiegaldie, D., Slade, S.C., Jazayeri, D., Shaw, L., Knight, M., et al. (2022b). Healthcare professional
perspectives on barriers and enablers to falls prevention education: A qualitative study. PLoS
One, 17(4), e0266797. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0266797
Hodgson, S., Watts, I., Fraser, S., Roderick, P., & Dambha-Miller, H. (2020). Loneliness, social isolation,
cardiovascular disease and mortality: A synthesis of the literature and conceptual framework. Journal
of the Royal Society of Medicine, 113(5), 185–192. doi:10.1177/0141076820918236
Hoffman, G. J., Malani, P. N., Solway, E., Kirch, M., Singer, D. C., & Kullgren, J. T. (2022). Changes
in activity levels, physical functioning, and fall risk during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 70(1), 49–59. doi:10.1111/jgs.17477
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). (n.d.). International Classification
of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). WHO. https://www.who.int/classifications/icf/en/
James, S. L., Lucchesi, L. R., Bisignano, C., Castle, C. D., Dingels, Z. V., & Fox, J. T. (2020). The global
burden of falls: Global, regional, and national estimates of morbidity and mortality from the global
burden of disease study 2017. Injury Prevention, 26, i3–i11.
Kappelhof, R. (2021). EIP on AHA achievements: Action group A2 - Falls prevention. EC. https://
futurium.ec.europa.eu/en/active-and-healthy-living-digital-world/library/eip-aha-achievements-actiongroup-
a2-falls-prevention
Lee, D.-C. A., Pritchard, E., McDermott, F., & Haines, T. P. (2014). Falls prevention education for
older adults during and after hospitalization: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Education
Journal, 73(5), 530–544. doi:10.1177/0017896913499266
153
Preventing Falls
﻿
Montero-Odasso, M., van der Velde, N., Martin, F.C., Petrovic, M., Tan, M.P., & Ryg, J. (2022). World
guidelines for falls prevention and management for older adults: A global initiative. Age and Ageing,
2, 1–36.
Montero-Odasso, M.M., Kamkar, N., Pieruccini-Faria, F., Osman, A., Sarquis-Adamson, Y., Close, J.,
& ... Task Force on Global Guidelines for Falls in Older Adults. (2021). Evaluation of Clinical Practice
Guidelines on Fall Prevention and Management for Older Adults: A Systematic Review. JAMA Network
Open, 1, e2138911.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). (2019). 2019 surveillance of falls in older
people: assessing risk and prevention (NICE guideline CG161). Surveillance report. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK551819/
O’Leary, N., Salmon, N., & Clifford, A. M. (2020). ‘It benefits patient care’: The value of practice-based
IPE in healthcare curriculums. BMC Medical Education, 20, 424.
Pajala, S. (2012). Iäkkäiden kaatumisten ehkäisy. [Finnish institute for health and welfare]. Opas, 16. https://
www.julkari.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/79998/THL_Opas_16_verkko.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Panel on Prevention of Falls in Older Persons, American Geriatrics Society and British Geriatrics Society.
(2011). Summary of the Updated American Geriatrics Society/British Geriatrics Society clinical
practice guideline for prevention of falls in older persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,
59(1), 148–157.
Reyes, J. R., Álvarez, L. N. R., & Pomarede, M. J. M. (2018). Pedagogical aspects in nursing education:
Integrative review. Investigacion y Educacion en Enfermeria, 36(3), 1–17.
Schoberer, D., Eglseer, D., Halfens, R. J. G., & Lohrmann, C. (2018). Development and evaluation of
brochures for fall prevention education created to empower nursing home residents and family members.
International Journal of Older People Nursing, 13(2), e12187. doi:10.1111/opn.12187
Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., & Farlie, M. K. (2020). Education interventions for health professionals
on falls prevention in health care settings: A 10-year scoping review. BMC Geriatrics, 90(1), 460.
doi:10.118612877-020-01819-x
Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., Heng, H., & Morris, M. E. (2023). Interprofessional education to implement
patient falls education in hospitals: Lessons learned. Nursing Open, 10(1), 36–47. doi:10.1002/nop2.1276
Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., & Morris, M. E. (2021b). Educating health professionals to implement evidencebased
falls screening in hospitals. Nurse Education Today, 101, 104874. doi:10.1016/j.nedt.2021.104874
Shaw, L. K., Kiegaldie, D., Jones, C., & Morris, M. E. (2021a). Improving hospital falls screening
and mitigation using a health professional education framework. Nurse Education Today, 98, 104695.
doi:10.1016/j.nedt.2020.104695
154
Preventing Falls
﻿
Silén-Lipponen, M., Turjamaa, R., Tervo-Heikkinen, T., & Äijö, M. (2019). Nursing students learning
to prevent falls of older people through simulations. EAPRIL 2018 Conference Proceedings, Portorož,
Slovenia. https://www.eapril.org/sites/default/files/2019-03/Proceedings%202018%20publication.pdf
Taylor, D., McCaffrey, R., Reinoso, H., Mathis, M. W., Dickerson, L., & Hamrick, J. (2019). An interprofessional
education approach to fall prevention: Preparing members of the interprofessional healthcare
team to implement STEADI into practice. Gerontology & Geriatrics Education, 40(1), 105–120. doi:
10.1080/02701960.2018.1530226
Taylor, N. (2015). A patient education program supported by staff training can reduce the rate of falls
for older patients during inpatient rehabilitation [synopsis]. Journal of Physiotherapy, 61(4), 224.
doi:10.1016/j.jphys.2015.07.016
The Finnish Association of Physiotherapists. (2017). Kaatumisten ja kaatumisvammojen ehkäisyn fysioterapiasuositus.
Terveys Portti. https://www.terveysportti.fi/dtk/sfs/avaa?p_artikkeli=sfs00003
The Prevention of Falls Network for Dissemination (ProFouND). (2015). Resources. Profound. https://
profound.eu.com/category/resources/
Tiedemann, A., Sturnieks, D.L., Hill, A.M., Lovitt, L., Clemson, L., & Lord, S.R. (2021). Impact of a
fall prevention education program for health and exercise professionals: a randomised controlled trial.
Public Health Research & Practice, 31(3), 30342013. doi:10.17061/phrp30342013.
Torkshavand, G., Khatiban, M., & Soltanian, A. R. (2020). Simulation-based learning to enhance
students’ knowledge and skills in educating older patients. Nurse Education in Practice, 42, 102678.
doi:10.1016/j.nepr.2019.102678
Turjamaa, R., Äijö, M., Tervo-Heikkinen, T., & Silèn-Lipponen, M. (2020). A Qualitative Study of
Nursing Students’ Experiences in Fall Prevention for Older Home Care Clients. Journal of Aging.
doi:10.1155/2020/7652623
Valtorta, N.K., Kanaan, M., Gilbody, S., Ronzi, S. & Hanratty, B. (2016). Loneliness and social isolation
as risk factors for coronary heart disease and stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal
observational studies. Heart, 102(13), 1009-16. doi:. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2015-308790
Vieira, E. R., Palmer, R. C., & Chaves, P. H. (2016). Prevention of falls in older people living in the
community. British Medical Journal, 53, 1–13.
Ward, M., May, P., Normand, C., Kenny, R.A. & Nolan, A. (2021a). Mortality risk associated with
combinations of loneliness and social isolation. Findings from The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing
(TILDA). Age Ageing, 50(4), 1329-1335. doi:. doi:10.1093/ageing/afab004
Ward, M., O’Mahoney, P., & Kenny, R. A. (2021b). Altered lives in a time of crisis: The impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the lives of older adults in Ireland. Findings from The Irish Longitudinal Study
on Ageing. https://www.doi.org/10.38018/TildaRe.2021-01
155
Preventing Falls
﻿
Welsh, T. J., Gordon, A. L., & Gladman, J. R. (2014). Comprehensive geriatric assessment—a guide for
the non-specialist. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 68(3), 290–293. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ijcp.12313
World Health Organization (WHO). (2010). Framework for Action on Interprofessional Education and
Collaborative Practice. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). World report on ageing and health. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021). Step safely: strategies for preventing and manageingAGEING
falls across the life-course. World Health Organization.
Ye, P., Er, Y., Wang, H., Fang, L., Li, B., & Ivers, R. (2021). Burden of falls among people aged 60 years
and older in mainland China, 1990-2019: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. The
Lancet. Public Health, 6, e907–e918.
Section 3
Proposals for treatment and intervention in the elderly, ranging from illness to therapeutic adherence,
not forgetting the factors that affect the satisfaction of individuals in the provision of healthcare with the
monitorization of all the processes are explored.
Treatment, Monitoring, and
Satisfaction of the Elderly
157
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 10
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch010
ABSTRACT
The increase in average life expectancy, accompanied by medical and technological advances, translates
into an increase in chronic diseases and a constant updating of therapeutic strategies whose success
depends on patient compliance. This scoping review followed the JBI methodology, according to
the PCC method, and the aim was to identify measures associated with nursing care that improve the
therapeutic adherence of the elderly with a chronic disease. These nursing interventions include continuous
monitoring and surveillance, in person or digitally, using videos, remote monitoring software,
or teleconsultations; personalized therapeutic plans; skills training based on a model of information,
motivation, and behavior; the explanation of the value and therapeutic intent of the care plan; cognitive
behavioral therapy; and the continuous validation through the teach-back method. Evidence shows the
relevance of nursing intervention in the process of health education to the elderly person.
Nursing Intervention in the
Therapeutic Adherence of the
Elderly With Chronic Disease:
A Scoping Review
Tânia Martins Gonçalves
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8302-948X
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria da Conceição Farinha
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Cristina Marques-Vieira
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4409-7911
Nursing School, Universidade Católica
Portuguesa, Portugal
Maria Augusta Gomes Alves Ferreira
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria Adelaide Paiva
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal
Maria do Céu Neves
Higher School of Health, University of Algarve,
Portugal
158
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
INTRODUCTION
The increase in average life expectancy is reflected in the increase in the elderly population worldwide.
Therefore, it is necessary to adopt new strategies to enhance the autonomy, confidence, and mobility of
these people, allowing, simultaneously, to extend the time they can live under the most favorable conditions.
Chronic diseases are the main causes of morbidity and mortality in Europe, accounting for more than
2/3 of all deaths and 75% of healthcare costs (Gemmill, 2019). This aspect, accompanied by technological
medical advances, translates into a constant update of therapeutic strategies. However, the success
of these strategies depends on the empowerment of the elderly to adhere to the therapeutic regimen,
minimizing complications of diseases and, therefore, in quality of life (López-Romero et al, 2016; Lefler
et al., 2018; Avazeh et al., 2019).
One of the main issues in improving the quality of life of the elderly is maintaining their autonomy in
physical and cognitive activities. The concept of “self-care” was introduced by Orem (2001), referring
to the learned behaviors that people demonstrate to maintain or improve their life, health, well-being,
prevention, and treatment. Due to the chronic nature of the disease, adherence to the therapeutic regimen
promotes self-care and changes in lifestyle that translate into increased well-being, prevention of
exacerbation of signs and symptoms, and reduction in the number of hospitalizations and treatment
costs (Chew et al, 2021).
Non-adherence to the therapeutic regimen is a common problem among elderly people with chronic
diseases. Many studies have been developed, but this situation continues to constitute a health problem
that is difficult to resolve because the causes of non-adherence among the elderly are multiple and complex
(WHO, 2003). Consequently, health professionals, particularly nurses, must combine educational
and behavioral strategies that promote this compliance, considering the client’s age and the stage of the
disease.
Adherence to the therapeutic regimen is defined by WHO (2003, p. 18) as: ‘the extent to which a
person’s behavior – taking medication, following a diet, and/or executing lifestyle changes – corresponds
with agreed recommendations from a health care provider’. This concept does not intend to reflect a
judgment, a failure of the client, or the prescribed treatment, but states a fact so that it can be prevented
(Haynes et al. 2008).
Given the above, it was decided to elaborate a scoping review, guided by the methodology proposed
by the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) (Peters et al., 2020), to systematically explore and map the evidence
available in the literature on the intervention of the nurse in the therapeutic adherence of the elderly
person with a chronic disease. Such data are relevant since they can support the analysis, reflection, and
investigation of the nurse’s role in this context.
More specifically, this review aims to answer the question: What are the nursing interventions that
facilitate therapeutic adherence in elderly people with chronic illnesses?
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW METHOD
According to the recommendations of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) for conducting a scoping review
(Peters et al., 2020), the PCC strategy (participants, concept, and context) was used with the following
inclusion criteria:
159
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
Inclusion Criteria
Search Strategy
The research strategy included studies written in English, French, Spanish, and Portuguese, published in
the last 10 years, more specifically between September 2012 and September 2022. Data were collected
using the CINAHL Plus with Full-Text databases and MEDLINE with Full Text, from the EBSCOhost
platform.
Initially, an initial search was carried out in the databases included to analyze and group the words
contained in the text of the titles and abstracts most used in the articles. In a second moment, a search
was carried out in these same databases using the identified keywords and indexing terms. Subsequently,
the bibliographic references of the articles and studies identified were analyzed to search and include
additional studies.
The search results were exported to the Mendeley® reference management software and duplicate
articles were removed. Then, a critical and reflective reading of the titles and abstracts of the researched
articles was carried out to evaluate their relevance to the review. A careful analysis of the articles that
meet the inclusion criteria, through full reading, was performed to extract the evidence related to the
contributions of nursing interventions on the health of the elderly. To organize the analysis, phrases,
and words that corresponded to elements of interest related to models of professional nursing practice
were identified and transcribed.
The data extraction includes a logical and descriptive summary of the results that must be in line with
the objectives and questions of the scoping review (Peters et al., 2020). To systematize the information
in the articles, the extracted data were descriptively compiled by two independent reviewers, using an
instrument previously prepared by the authors.
At all stages, the analysis of the full text of the articles was performed by two reviewers independently,
to verify the satisfaction of the defined inclusion criteria. In cases where discrepancies were found, a
third reviewer was consulted for a final decision.
Table 1. Inclusion criteria
Participants Concept Context
Studies that include people over 65 years
of age Studies that include therapeutic adherence Studies that include nursing interventions
Study design
Quantitative, qualitative, mixed-method studies, and literature reviews.
Publication Language
Studies published in Portuguese, Spanish, French or English
Publication date
Studies published between 1 September 2012 and 30 September 2022
160
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
PRESENTATION AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
To enable a mapping of the data extracted from the articles included in the review, the results of a scoping
review must be presented in the form of graphs, figures, and/or tables (Peters et al., 2020).
In the research, 281 articles were identified, of which 14 were excluded because they were duplicates.
Of the 267 remaining articles, 227 were excluded after analyzing the title and abstract. Subsequently,
of the remaining 40 articles, 29 were excluded after reading the full text for not meeting the inclusion
criteria. Conclusively, 11 studies that present nursing interventions that facilitate the management of the
therapeutic regimen of a person with a chronic disease were included in the review (Figure 1).
Figure 1. PRISMA Flowchart (adapted): Study selection process
161
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
The 11 included studies originated from different regions of the globe and were published between
2012 and 2022. Of these, four are European, five are Asian, and two are from North America.
Regarding methodology, three use quantitative methods, two use qualitative methods, and 6 use
mixed methods.
The characteristics of the included studies are presented in table 2.
Table 2. Description of the included studies
Authors Title Year Country Methodology Participants
Roshandel et al.
(2020)
“The Effect of Using Peer on
Self-Care, Quality of Life, and
Adherence in Elderly People with
Coronary Artery Disease”
2021 Iran Quantitative (clinical
trial) 30
Henriques,
Costa & Cabrita
(2012)
“Adherence and medication
management by the elderly” 2012 Portugal
Qualitative (descriptive
research design was
employed using
two focus groups as
the method of data
collection)
9
Pereira,
Teixeira, Lopes
& Sousa (2020)
“Evolution of SmartBEAT for
Heart Failure Telemonitoring” 2020 Portugal Mixed design 46
Verwey et al.
(2015)
“Process evaluation of physical
activity counselling with and
without the use of mobile
technology: A mixed methods
study”
2015 Netherlands Mixed design 131
Hu et al. (2022)
“Influence of Nurse-Led Health
Education on Self-Management
Ability, Satisfaction, and
Compliance of Elderly Patients
with Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease Based on
Knowledge, Belief, and Practice
Model”
2022 China Mixed design 60
Shahsavari et al.
(2020)
“Is Telenursing an Effective
Method to Control BMI and
HbA1c in Illiterate Patients
Aged 50 Years and Older With
Type 2 Diabetes? A Randomized
Controlled Clinical Trial”
2020 Iran
Quantitative
(randomized controlled
clinical trial)
60
Heiney et al.
(2020)
“A Smartphone App for Self-
Management of Heart Failure
in Older African Americans:
Feasibility and Usability Study”
2020 United States of
America Mixed design 12
To et al. (2019)
“An information-motivationbehavioural-
based model and
adherence to inhalation therapy
and other health outcomes in
patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: A pilot
randomized controlled trial”
2019 Japan Mixed design 35
continues on following page
162
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
The nursing interventions that facilitate adherence to the therapeutic regimen by elderly people with
chronic illness are listed in table 3.
Table 3. Answers to the review’s research question per study
Study Nursing intervention in the therapeutic adherence of the elderly with chronic disease
and results
Roshandel et al. (2020)
Education based on multimedia clips by peers was effective in increasing the mean scores of
self-care adherence, and quality of life among elderly people with coronary artery disease.
Considering the low cost, high effectiveness, and decrease in the nurses’ workload, this
method is recommended to be used alongside other methods to educate elderly individuals
suffering from coronary artery disease.
Henriques, Costa & Cabrita (2012)
Four categories emerged on strategies used for medication management by elderly people
living at home: living with drugs, taking medication, belief about drugs and relationship
with health professionals. Participants refer that the information transmitted by nurses during
a nursing consultation is very important in managing the medication regimen.
Pereira, Teixeira, Lopes & Sousa (2020)
Telemonitoring technologies enable autonomous monitoring and timely feedback to
caregivers and healthcare professionals. SmartBEAT is an e-Health system composed of a
mobile application for smartphones that allows autonomous monitoring and the provision
of timely feedback to caregivers and health professionals. This system was tested, in a pilot
phase, with a user adherence of 97% for three months.
Verwey et al. (2015)
A Self-management Support Program was implemented, including a monitoring-andfeedback
tool. This tool was developed to encourage physical activity, providing feedback
to clients and nurses. Its use was combined with the behaviour change counselling protocol.
Clients who used the monitoring-and-feedback tool in conjunction with physical activity
advice from nurses showed better results in terms of improving physical activity than clients
who only received advice on physical activity.
Hu et al. (2022)
Health education provided by nurses, based on the model of knowledge, belief, and practice,
can improve the self-management ability, satisfaction, and compliance of elderly COPD
patients.
Shahsavari et al. (2020)
Telenursing can improve therapeutic regimen adherence in people with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. The results show statistically significant decrease in body mass index and
glycosylated hemoglobin.
Authors Title Year Country Methodology Participants
Swavely et al.
(2014)
“Implementation and evaluation
of a low health literacy and
culturally sensitive diabetes
education program”
2014 United States of
America Mixed design 106
Murdoch (2019)
“Patient concordance in
the management of chronic
oedema: role of the independent
prescriber”
2019 Ireland Qualitative (case study) 1
Valsaraj et al.
(2021)
“Follow-Up Study on the Effect
of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
on Haemodialysis Adherence: A
randomised controlled trial”
2021 India
Quantitative
(randomized controlled
clinical trial)
67
Table 2. Continued
continues on following page
163
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
There are different methods to improve adherence to the therapeutic regimen in elderly people with
chronic disease. Peer client education is one such method. It consists of an approach that aims to develop
knowledge and attitudes and create healthy behaviors through sharing between individuals who,
not being professionally trained, have common experiences. Methods used for peer education include
group workshops, group discussions, and individual discussions, intending to transfer and communicate
accurate information between group members who have similar experiences and characteristics. Due to
the similar nature of the disease condition, empathy and social identity are strengthened, which is why
clients more easily accept information from peers and share their beliefs and feelings. In this sense, the
study carried out by Roshandel et al. (2020) revealed that the use of multimedia-based peer education
leads to a significant increase in mean scores of self-care, therapeutic adherence, and quality of life
Study Nursing intervention in the therapeutic adherence of the elderly with chronic disease
and results
Heiney et al. (2020)
The Healthy Heart application is part of an intervention aimed at self-monitoring of
symptoms, health literacy and confidence (self-efficacy) of clients with heart failure. In
this application, customers receive messages daily to remind them of the need for daily
monitoring of body weight, and educational and motivational messages. In addition to
these messages, customers receive personalized feedback and make a daily record in the
application. Results show clinically relevant changes in self-care maintenance, management,
and confidence.
To et al. (2019)
A program based on information-motivation-behavioural skills improves inhalation
adherence, inhalation techniques, and quality of life in obstructive pulmonary disease
patients. The first session was face-to-face, individual, and lasted one hour. In this session,
based on the contents addressed, the nurse prepared a report, gathered patient information,
and identified problems, provided information, counselling, enhanced correct inhalation
techniques and related behaviours and established an action plan. The second and fourth
session took place in the second and fourth week and it lasted 30 minutes via telephone, with
the objective to evaluate, identify problem and counselling.
Swavely et al. (2014)
The low health literacy and culturally sensitive diabetes education program included
individualized and group sessions with 13 hours of education over 12 weeks. This program
was destined patients with diabetes mellitus type 2.
The teach-back method, map visuals, conversation questions, discussion cards, group
interaction, and facilitation were used to empower clients to manage the therapeutic
regimen and take responsibility for their own selfcare. At the end of the program, patients
had significant improvements in their knowledge about diabetes, self-efficacy and in three
domains of self-care including diet, foot care and exercise.
Murdoch (2019)
The use of a prescription pyramid helped the nurse in health education in patients with
chronic oedema, specifically in the prescription of compression to manage chronic oedema.
This prescribing pyramid must consecutively consider the following principles: reflection,
record keeping, review, negotiating a contract, choosing a product, choosing a strategy, and
taking the patient into account. Including the patient in the decision-making process favours
agreement and helps to reduce unnecessary prescriptions and avoid non-adherence to the
therapeutic regimen.
Valsaraj et al. (2021)
The cognitive behaviour therapy on patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing
haemodialysis is more effective than non-directive counselling for improving therapeutic
adherence. This intervention aims to analyse and replace negative thoughts with stimuli that
promote emotional regulation and positive behavioural changes. There was a statistically
significant improvement in the experimental group compared to the control group,
particularly regarding to interdialytic weight gain, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood
pressure, haemoglobin, dialysis adherence, fluid adherence, diet and drug adherence in the
patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing haemodialysis.
Table 2. Continued
164
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
among elderly people with coronary artery disease compared to the control group. Clients received three
20-minute educational videos about coronary artery disease that were shared by a peer who had been on
treatment for at least six months and who had been previously trained by a nurse. These videos addressed
the therapeutic regimen and information on how to perform activities of daily living.
Regarding medication management, a study carried out by Henriques, Costa, and Cabrita (2012) in
Portugal, identified that the strategies used for medication management by elderly people living at home
include four categories: live with drugs, take medication, beliefs about drugs, and relationship with health
professionals. The study participants mentioned that the therapeutic relationship established with health
professionals is a fundamental aspect of medication adherence, namely the information transmitted by
the nurse during the consultation.
The use of telemedicine and telemonitoring technologies is also advantageous in the management
of the elderly person’s therapeutic regimen. Mobile health apps allow clients and nurses quick and easy
access to health information in real-time, which can help in making health decisions and, inherently,
improve patient outcomes. Recent studies show that the use of these apps can contribute to a reduction
in mortality and hospitalizations and increase adherence to therapy. Among the benefits associated with
this strategy, the fact that the elderly do not need to leave the comfort of their home to interact with the
nurses is identified, since it is possible to give and receive daily feedback through these new applications,
wearable technology, and healthcare platform. These systems are associated with an improvement
in costs, autonomy, self-confidence, and customer mobility (Pereira, Teixeira, Lopes, & Sousa, 2020).
The Smart System for Management of Heart Failure in Older Adults (SmartBEAT) is an e-Health
system, developed in Portugal, which consists of an application for smartphones intended for patients
with a diagnosis of heart failure. This application allows you to collect physiological information (weight,
blood pressure, heart rate, medication intake, physical activity, SpO2) from the client using a Vital Signs
System. In addition to automatic responses, the nurse can interact with the client through the application.
There was 97% user adherence to the platform for 3 months, including people with low technology
literacy (Pereira, Teixeira, Lopes, & Sousa, 2020).
Also in the United States of America, an application was developed - Healthy Heart - which was
built interactively, based on a literature review, and information from clients with heart failure and
health professionals, including nurses. The application aims to promote self-monitoring of symptoms,
health literacy, and confidence (self-efficacy). Three messages were sent daily to customers through the
application, particularly a reminder to carry out daily monitoring of body weight, an educational and
motivational message. In addition to these messages, customers receive personalized feedback and make
daily records in the application. After the intervention, there was an improvement in self-perception
of health: at the beginning of the study, 42% of the participants reported that their health was poor or
fair, a value that decreased to 18% at the end of the study. As for physically unhealthy days, there was a
reduction in the mean value from 4 days to 2.54 days. After the intervention, there was also a reduction
from 2.58 to 1.73 in the number of days participants reported experiencing limitations in daily activities
due to poor physical or mental health. The participants presented clinically relevant results, specifically
concerning heart failure self-care maintenance, management, and confidence. They also showed low
rates of hospital readmissions and emergency room visits (Heiney et al., 2020).
Another study, carried out in the Netherlands, used a Self-management Support Program to improve
the adherence of people with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease or Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus to
physical exercise. Group 1 was submitted to the use of a tool embedded in the counseling protocol called
the Self-management Support Program and group 2 was submitted only to the Self-management Support
165
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
Program. Clients who used the monitoring-and-feedback tool were 14% more satisfied with the advice
provided by nurses than the group that did not use this tool, considering that using the tool was fun; it
led to greater awareness and more discipline. Regarding the self-perception of improvement in physical
activity, 75% of the clients who used the mobile device considered that their levels of physical activity
had improved compared to 46% of the clients in group 2. The nurses themselves considered that the
intervention using the tool was more effective since monitoring encourages people to be more physically
active and guides the advice given by the nurse to each client (Verwey et al., 2015).
Health education carried out by nurses, based on the Knowledge, Belief, and Practice Model influences
the self-management ability, satisfaction, and compliance of elderly patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. A study carried out in China revealed that the compliance rate of the study group
was 26% higher than that of the control group. The control group received routine nursing consultation
and the patients in the study group received nurse-led health education based on knowledge, belief, and
practice model. There were statistically significant improvements in the study group compared to the
control group. The symptoms management, daily life management, emotion management, information
management, and management efficiency were higher in the study group than in the control group.
Equally the outcomes of physiological, psychological, and social function and health self-perception
decreased in the study group than in the control group (Hu et al., 2022).
A study carried out in India (Valsaraj et al., 2021) aimed to evaluate the effect of cognitive behavior
therapy on patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing hemodialysis. A structured individual therapy
of cognitive, behavioral, and didactic techniques with 10 weekly sessions was given to the experimental
group. In these sessions, the nurse tried to analyze and replace negative thoughts to achieve emotional
regulation and positive behavioral changes. Subsequently, there was a significant improvement in interdialytic
weight gain, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, hemoglobin, dialysis adherence, fluid adherence,
diet adherence, and drug adherence. The improvement in these outcomes was maintained for three to six
months after the intervention. So, there was a significant impact of the use of cognitive behavior therapy
by nurses on compliance with recommended diet, fluids, drugs, and dialysis (Valsaraj et al., 2021).
Nurses need to understand the disease and perception of treatment from the patient’s perspective and
thus address their individual concerns. A study carried out in Hong Kong (To et al., 2019) identified that
clients with obstructive pulmonary disease identified that the main barriers to adherence to the therapeutic
regimen and optimization of inhalation techniques were time constraints, and insufficient knowledge
and skills. In this sense, they sought to develop a program based on information-motivation-behavioral
skills to improve inhalation adherence. The intervention included a first face-to-face session to assess the
client’s knowledge of the disease and therapeutic regimen, attitudes towards adherence, and inhalation
techniques. Based on the assessment results, the educational content was adapted to meet the individual
needs of each client and answer their questions. In this session, proper breathing and inhalation techniques
were reinforced; and the demonstration and skills training were carried out. In this session, the
nurse defined the self-directed goals and the corresponding action plan with the clients. In the second
and fourth weeks of the program, a telephone follow-up was carried out. In these teleconsultations, the
nurse assessed respiratory symptoms and difficulties related to medication adherence; analyzed with
the client the level of achievement of the objectives, eventual barriers to the achievement of previously
defined goals, and, in a partnership approach, outlined continuity strategies to be adopted. The nurse
also used positive reinforcement to improve patients’ self-efficacy in positive behavioral changes. This
program had a positive effect on inhalation adherence, optimization of inhalation techniques, and quality
of life in obstructive pulmonary disease patients (To et al., 2019).
166
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
Telenursing is a strategy that does not require many technological resources, it can improve adherence
to the therapeutic regimen in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus. A study carried out in Iran
(Shahsavari et al., 2020) involving 60 Illiterate Patients with Type 2 Diabetes, showed that face-to-face
group health education sessions, accompanied by telephone nursing consultations, are effective in the
continuity of care and health improvement. All subjects completed the group self-management training
for diabetes in three days. Subsequently, telephone follow-ups were carried out for 3 months in the intervention
group, with each teleconsultation taking an average of 20 minutes. In this study group, their
adherence to the treatment plan (including exercise, diet, and medication) was evaluated twice a week
in the first and second months, and once a week in the third month. The contents addressed in the nursing
teleconsultation included the assessment of adherence to the therapeutic plan and the proposal of
solutions to facilitate compliance. The control group received routine care from the diabetes outpatient
clinic. There was a statistically significant decrease in body mass index (decreased to 0.93 kg/m2 after
the study) and glycosylated hemoglobin (decreased to 1.40%) in the intervention group compared to the
control group (Shahsavari et al., 2020).
The use of map visuals, conversation questions, discussion cards, group interaction, and facilitation
also promotes the empowerment of patients to manage the therapeutic regimen and to take responsibility
for their self-care. These strategies, together with the use of the teach-back method, were integrated
into a diabetes education program designed to be culturally sensitive and meet the needs of individuals
with low health literacy. This program comprised 13 hours of health education over 12 weeks. At first,
aspects related to the human body and adequate functions were addressed, and then the aspects associated
with the management of the therapeutic regimen in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus were discussed.
The teach-back method aimed to promote the memorization and reaffirmation of the contents learned
by the patients, to guarantee that they assimilated and understood the information. Aspects related to
self-efficacy, the belief in their ability to complete tasks, manage situations, and reach goals, were also
highlighted to encourage the client’s involvement in the management of the therapeutic regimen. At the
end of the program, patients had significant improvements in diabetes knowledge, self-efficacy, and in
three domains of self-care including diet, foot care, and exercise (Swavely et al., 2014).
In the management of disease and therapeutic regimen, patient-related factors are critical, particularly
patient compliance with therapies. In this sense, the nurse needs to negotiate the therapeutic regimen with
the patient, considering their knowledge and health beliefs. A case study, which took place in the United
Kingdom, revealed that a prescription pyramid is a facilitator of effective nursing prescription. This tool
must consider, consecutively, from bottom to top, seven principles: reflection, record keeping, reviewing,
negotiating a contract, choosing a product, choosing a strategy, and considering the patient. All these
principles guide the aspects to be systematically worked with the client during the nursing consultation,
before prescribing, canceling the prescription, or even not prescribing an intervention. A subsidized
approach in this process facilitates an accurate differential diagnosis, the identification of strategies to
be adopted, and the client’s inclusion in the care plan. In this case study, this patient-centered approach
included a global assessment from the beginning, allowing to identify the etiology of the symptoms presented,
to analyze in detail the reason for the failure of previous strategies for managing the therapeutic
regimen in a situation of chronic edema of the lower limbs and to guarantee a prescription with positive
and satisfactory outcomes, namely in the management of the therapeutic regimen (Murdoch, 2019).
167
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
CONCLUSION
The objective of this scoping review was to explore and map the available scientific evidence on nursing
interventions that facilitate therapeutic adherence in elderly people with chronic illness. The limitation of
this review is the exclusion of articles in other languages than Portuguese, Spanish, English, or French.
Extensive research in other databases could be important in identifying relevant results.
Eleven studies from Europe, Asia, and North America were identified in this review.
Nursing interventions that improve therapeutic adherence can occur in person, through scheduled
and unscheduled consultations, or digitally, using videos, remote monitoring software, teleconsultations
(video or call), or text messages (SMS) that integrate reminders, additional information, and questions/
answers. Measures that enhance therapeutic adherence include continuous monitoring and surveillance,
the elaboration of a personalized and gradual therapeutic plan; skills training based on a model
of information, motivation, and behavior; the explanation of the value and therapeutic intent of the care
plan; cognitive behavioral therapy; the use of schemes that elucidate the objectives and period; and the
continuous validation of the patient education through the teach-back method.
Evidence shows that the development and implementation of educational and behavioral interventions
promote self-care and adherence translated into health gains. The need and relevance of nursing
consultations (face-to-face or remotely) in the process of health education to the elderly person are also
evidenced.
REFERENCES
Avazeh, M., Babaei, N., Farhoudi, S., Kalteh, E. A., & Gholizadeh, B. (2019). The study of self-care and
related factors in the elderly with chronic diseases in 2018. Journal of Health and Care, 21(2), 135–144.
doi:10.29252/jhc.21.2.135
Chew, S. M., Lee, J. H., Lim, S. F., Liew, M. J., Xu, Y., & Towle, R. M. (2021). Prevalence and predictors
of medication non‐adherence among older community‐dwelling people with chronic disease in
Singapore. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 77(10), 4069–4080. doi:10.1111/jan.14913 PMID:34061364
Gemmill, M. (2019). Research note: Chronic Disease Management in Europe. Brussels: European
Commission.
Haynes, R. B., Ackloo, E., Sahota, N., McDonald, H. P., & Yao, X. (2008). Interventions for enhancing
medication adherence. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (2). doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000011.
pub3 PMID:18425859
Heiney, S. P., Donevant, S. B., Arp Adams, S., Parker, P. D., Chen, H., & Levkoff, S. (2020). A Smartphone
App for Self-Management of Heart Failure in Older African Americans: Feasibility and Usability
Study. JMIR Aging, 3(1), e17142. doi:10.2196/17142 PMID:32242822
Henriques, M. A., Costa, M. A., & Cabrita, J. (2012). Adherence and medication management by the
elderly. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 21(21–22), 3096–3105. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2702.2012.04144.x
168
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
Hu, W., Li, T., Cao, S., Gu, Y., & Chen, L. (2022). Influence of Nurse-Led Health Education on Self-
Management Ability, Satisfaction, and Compliance of Elderly Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease Based on Knowledge, Belief, and Practice Model. Computational and Mathematical
Methods in Medicine, 1782955, 1–9. doi:10.1155/2022/1782955 PMID:35979056
Lefler, L. L., Rhoads, S. J., Harris, M., Funderburg, A. E., Lubin, S. A., Martel, I. D., Faulkner, J. L.,
Rooker, J. L., Bell, D. K., Marshall, H., & Beverly, C. J. (2018). Evaluating the Use of Mobile Health
Technology in Older Adults With Heart Failure: Mixed-Methods Study. JMIR Aging, 1(2), e12178.
doi:10.2196/12178 PMID:31518257
López-Romero, L. A., Romero-Guevara, S. L., Parra, D. I., & Rojas-Sánchez, L. Z. (2016). Adherencia
al tratamiento: Concepto y medición. Hacia la Promoción de la Salud, 21(1), 117–137. doi:10.17151/
hpsal.2016.21.1.10
Murdoch, V. (2019). Patient concordance in the management of chronic oedema: role of the independent
prescriber. British Journal of Community Nursing, 24(Sup4), S6–S10. doi:10.12968/bjcn.2019.24.Sup4.S6
Orem, D. E. (2001). Nursing: Concepts of practice (6th ed.). Mosby.
Pereira, J., Teixeir, J., Lopes, I., & Sousa, F. (2020). Evolution of SmartBEAT for Heart Failure Telemonitoring.
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 273, 189–194. doi:10.3233/SHTI200637
PMID:33087611
Peters, M. D., Godfrey, C., McInerney, P., Munn, Z., Tricco, A. C., & Khalil, H. (2020.). Scoping reviews.
In Aromataris, E. & Munn, Z. (Eds.), JBI manual for evidence synthesis. JBI. https://synthesismanual.
jbi.global. doi:10.46658/JBIMES-20-12
Roshandel, M., Rakhshan, M., & Najafi Kalyani, M. (2021). The Effect of Using Peer on Self-Care,
Quality of Life, and Adherence in Elderly People with Coronary Artery Disease. TheScientificWorld-
Journal, 2021, 1–7. doi:10.1155/2021/4770721 PMID:34916875
Shahsavari, A., & Bakhshandeh Bavarsad, M. (2020). Is Telenursing an Effective Method to Control
BMI and HbA1c in Illiterate Patients Aged 50 Years and Older With Type 2 Diabetes? A Randomized
Controlled Clinical Trial. Journal of Caring Sciences, 9(2), 73–79. doi:10.34172/JCS.2020.011
PMID:32626668
Swavely, D., Vorderstrasse, A., Maldonado, E., Eid, S., & Etchason, J. (2014). Implementation and
evaluation of a low health literacy and culturally sensitive diabetes education program. Journal for
Healthcare Quality : Official Publication of the National Association for Healthcare Quality, 36(6),
16–23. doi:10.1111/jhq.12021 PMID:23799918
To, K. W., Lee, I. F.-K., Choi, K. C., Cheung, Y. T. Y., & Yu, D. S.-F. (2020). An information-motivationbehavioural-
based model and adherence to inhalation therapy and other health outcomes in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A pilot randomized controlled trial. International Journal of
Nursing Practice, 26(2), e12799. doi:10.1111/ijn.12799 PMID:31903654
Valsaraj, B. P., Bhat, S. M., Prabhu, R., & Kamath, A. (2021). Follow-Up Study on the Effect of Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy on Haemodialysis Adherence: A randomised controlled trial. Sultan Qaboos
University Medical Journal, 21(1), e58–e65. doi:10.18295qumj.2021.21.01.008 PMID:33777424
169
Nursing Intervention in the Therapeutic Adherence of the Elderly With Chronic Disease
﻿
Verwey, R., van der Weegen, S., Spreeuwenberg, M., Tange, H., van der Weijden, T., & de Witte, L.
(2016). Process evaluation of physical activity counselling with and without the use of mobile technology:
A mixed methods study. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 53, 3–16. doi:10.1016/j.
ijnurstu.2015.10.008 PMID:26518108
World Health Organization. (2003). Adherence to long-term therapies : evidence for action. World Health
Organization. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42682
170
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 11
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch011
ABSTRACT
Neuropsychological testing is necessary to assess cognitive functions in individuals who exhibit signs
of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. This chapter presents the most commonly used
cognitive assessments for MCI and dementia in healthcare and academia, including information about
normative data, and cut-off scores. Some of the tests presented are: the mini-mental state examination,
trail making tests, montreal cognitive assessment, Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale-cognitive, and
clock drawing test. In addition, the chapter discusses the benefits of timely diagnosis and limitations in
the testing assessments that might affect the quality of life in individuals with cognitive decline due to
MCI and dementia diagnosis.
INTRODUCTION
Dementia is an irreversible clinical neurodegenerative syndrome and one of the most common diseases
diagnosed in old age (9%) (World Health Organization, 2021). Early signs of cognitive decline may include
memory issues, reasoning, problem-solving and task difficulties (Alzheimer’s Association, 2022;
Auning et al., 2011). However, dementia patients suffer from more complex cognitive deficits due to
the disease’s gradual neurodegenerative nature, including severe memory loss, thinking difficulties, and
problems sustaining conversations. The most common dementia subtypes are: Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
which shows amyloid plaques and tau tangles in brain scans (50–75%); vascular dementia (VD), which
shows damaged blood cells in brain images (20%); dementia with Lewy bodies (LBD) (10–15%) which
shows protein formation in the brain; and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) which shows abnormal tau
proteins and TDP-43 formation (2%) in brain scans (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
2018, 2021).
Cognitive Assessment Tools
for Dementia in Healthcare:
A Cognitive Ability Testing Guide
Aikaterini Christogianni
Loughborough University, UK
171
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Older adults often show signs of cognitive impairment that may or may not develop into dementia.
When their families notice signs of cognitive decline, they refer them to a family medical doctor for an
evaluation. The medical doctor then arranges cognitive assessments to examine whether the patient has
cognitive decline because of ageing, early signs of dementia, dementia, or a healthy brain. Neurologists
and clinicians assess dementia using brain scans such as computed tomography, magnetic resonance
imaging, and positron emission tomography; blood tests to measure beta-amyloid concentration; cognitive
tests that assess memory, problem-solving, language difficulties, calculation functions, body balance,
sensory and reflex responses (Jacova et al., 2007).
The chapter addresses the most common neuropsychological assessments used during screening
procedures for cognitive decline (Jacova et al., 2007; Jorm, 1996). They are reliable and valid methods
for determining whether a patient has cognitive impairment, producing results ranging from mild to
severe impairment. The chapter also discusses the benefits of timely diagnosis and health economics.
BACKGROUND
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or mild neurocognitive disorder, according to the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) (American Psychiatric Association, 2022),
refers to cognitive deterioration that does not affect daily activities and independent living (Petersen,
2016). MCI has 12% to 18% prevalence rates worldwide in people 60 years and older (Petersen, 2016).
When a family member or an individual notices symptoms of cognitive decline, such as problems with
memory, reasoning, task completion, and information processing (Alzheimer’s Association, 2022; Auning
et al., 2011), the first step is to visit a General Practitioner (GP) in primary care (Alzheimer’s Society,
2016; National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2018; Petersen, 2016). The individual is then
evaluated for cognitive impairment using neuropsychological testing procedures. Although cognitive
decline is a normal part of ageing, it may or may not be MCI. As a result, thorough testing by experienced
neuropsychologists and doctors may reveal evidence in each case.
MCI is classified into two types: amnestic (multiple-domain cognitive decline, especially memory
deterioration) and nonamnestic (cognitive deterioration in cognitive skills other than memory) (Alexopoulos
et al., 2006; Petersen, 2016; Yaffe et al., 2006). However, the amnestic MCI is more likely to
progress into dementia of the two categories (Alexopoulos et al., 2006; Petersen, 2016; Yaffe et al., 2006).
In particular, MCI patients with lesions in the posterior cingulate, anterior cingulate, hippocampus and
inferior parietal cortex might be diagnosed with dementia within a few years (Alexopoulos et al., 2006;
Evans et al., 2018; Iizuka et al., 2017; Jacobs et al., 2012). Cognitive test batteries for the MCI diagnosis
focus on assessing specific cognitive domains to suit the patients’ needs and determine the level of
cognitive decline (Monastero et al., 2009). Examples of such assessments are intelligence measurements,
attention, memory, language, spatial skills and many more (Monastero et al., 2009).
Dementia remains among the most common diseases diagnosed in old individuals (World Health
Organization, 2021). It is a syndrome characterised by chronic, progressive, irreversible brain neurodegeneration
caused by chemical and structural changes and results in neuronal loss and shrinkage of brain
volume (Dening & Sandilyan, 2015). Aside from memory loss, early signs of cognitive deterioration
include difficulty telling time, maintaining a conversation, navigating outdoors, and confusion during
information processing and decision-making (Alzheimer’s Association, 2022; Auning et al., 2011; Hettinga
et al., 2009).
172
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Although individuals may exhibit any of the listed symptomatology, determining whether they are
specific dementia signs or cognitive impairment due to MCI or normal ageing can sometimes be challenging
in healthcare settings. One way to tackle this issue is to visit a GP in time. Patients with cognitive
deficits must receive their diagnosis early before progressing to the moderate stages of their disease.
Once symptoms worsen to moderate cognitive decline, patients begin to experience serious difficulties
with recognising people and places, recalling names, understanding right and left orientation, telling
the time, counting, drawing and having conversations (Choe et al., 2008). Patients’ autobiographical
memory is intact, along with object naming (Choe et al., 2008). However, in severe stages, the cognitive
deterioration is so serious that patients cannot communicate their needs, make decisions about their
daily life, or live independently; thus, hospitalisations might be necessary (Epstein-Lubow & Fulton,
2012; Ning et al., 2020). Despite the fact that there are medical treatments for dementia, such as acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors and memantine, they only temporarily relieve symptoms but cannot cure them
(National Health Service, 2020b).
Since more people grow into old age, the number of dementia cases grows worldwide, and so do the
health and socioeconomic care costs for dementia patients (Han et al., 2021). As a result, healthcare has
given the highest consideration to suggesting early clinical testing and has created dementia information
policies that will be helpful in decision-making and quality of life after the diagnosis (Winblad et
al., 2016). The clinical cognitive assessments are conducted using neuropsychological tests that have
demonstrated good validity and reliability in distinguishing between healthy individuals and those with
cognitive impairment (Mitrushina et al., 2005; O’connor, 1990).
The clinical brain-behaviour assessments that assist in diagnosing MCI and dementia are neuropsychological
tests (Howieson, 2019). Their focus and importance are constantly evolving and changing to cover
the patient and healthcare needs. These assessments can be employed to determine the basic cognitive
functions in an individual, contribute to the diagnosis, estimate the prognosis of cognitive impairment,
and determine whether there are any mental health issues (Howieson, 2019). Neuropsychological tests
have been developed to measure specific cognitive skills, psychological and behavioural symptoms
in dementia. However, the assessments which have been tested for reliability, sensitivity, specificity,
construct and convergence validity are advantageous in screening and diagnosing neurological diseases
such as AD (Howieson, 2019).
It is important to note that many neuropsychological tests have normative data and include scores for
each group of people based on demographic categories, such as gender, age and education (Campbell,
2013; O’connor, 1990). Notably, each neuropsychological test has a set of cut-off scores that represent
the performance of a specific group of individuals (O’connor, 1990). As a result, the normative data
are representative sample measurements or scores from the general population, and they use baseline
distribution measurements to compare individuals and groups with each other (Campbell, 2013;
O’connor, 1990). These data types are essential in clinical practice because they assist in strengthening
and establishing correct diagnoses (Dodds et al., 2014; Mitrushina et al., 2005). Clinical normative data
is especially beneficial when evaluating the severity of cognitive deficits because it enables healthcare
professionals to characterise the patients’ cognitive skills based on how they function compared to others
with MCI and dementia.
173
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT ASSESSMENT TOOLS
The most commonly used cognitive assessments for MCI and dementia in healthcare and academia
worldwide are the following:
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) measures recall, attention, language, calculation, the
ability to follow simple commands, orientation, and the ability to repeat words. The test is a 30-item
questionnaire that takes 5 to 10 minutes to complete (Perneczky et al., 2006). In clinical settings, it has
been used to detect signs of cognitive deficits and dementia. The time orientation is tested by asking
questions about the time and date. The place orientation is tested by asking questions about the patient’s
current location. The repetition is tested by repeating the names of objects. The calculation and attention
are tested by backwards counting and backwards spelling. The recall is tested by recalling words.
Language ability is tested by repetition and writing sentences. Understanding complex instructions are
tested by copying a picture and following instructions (Pangman et al., 2000). Scores greater than 26
are considered normal, scores between 25 and 21 indicate mild impairment, scores between 20 and 11
indicate moderate impairment, and scores between 10 and 0 indicate severe dementia (Perneczky et
al., 2006). MMSE has good predictive validity and reliability in people with dementia, and it has been
translated into many languages (Baek et al., 2016; Davey & Jamieson, 2004; Güngen et al., 2002). Some
of the benefits of the MMSE are that it is useful and reliable in clinical practice, and it can distinguish
between individuals with cognitive impairment and without by being sensitive to age and education
demographic characteristics (Arevalo‐Rodriguez et al., 2015; Kurlowicz & Wallace, 1999; Simard,
1998). However, because it primarily relies on verbal response, reading, and writing, the MMSE cannot
differentiate between dementia types, may not detect early dementia, and cannot provide information
about judgement and social reasoning mental processes (Arevalo‐Rodriguez et al., 2015; Kurlowicz &
Wallace, 1999; Simard, 1998).
The Trail Making Test (TMT) is one of the most common cognitive tests in healthcare, and it assesses
visual search speed, visual scanning, psychomotor and processing speed, mental flexibility, as well as
executive functioning (Ashendorf et al., 2008). There are two versions: the TMT A, which has 25 circles
with numbers ranging from 1 to 25, and the TMT B, which has 25 circles with numbers ranging from
1 to 13 and letters ranging from A to L (Rasmusson et al., 1998; Zalonis et al., 2008). The patient is
required to connect the numbers in order in TMT A, and connect the letters and and numbers by alternating
between them in TMT B (Rasmusson et al., 1998; Zalonis et al., 2008). When patients take more
than 80 seconds to complete TMT A, and 275 seconds to complete TMT B, it indicates that there are
signs of brain impairment (Rasmusson et al., 1998; Zalonis et al., 2008). The test has shown predictive
validity in distinguishing cognitive deficits between ageing groups and AD based on error analyses, and
it has been used in many countries and languages (Amieva et al., 1998; CANGÖZ et al., 2013; Wei et
al., 2018). The TMT has the advantages of detecting executive dysfunction, being a reliable and robust
measure of cognitive processing, and indicating moderate to severe impairment (Bowie & Harvey, 2006;
Linari et al., 2022). Nonetheless, the evaluation of executive functions is not discriminated, and as a
result, TMT has low specificity (Bowie & Harvey, 2006; Linari et al., 2022).
The Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (Mini-ACE) is a 10-minute assessment tool for
dementia and evaluates memory, orientation, visuospatial function, and language (Charernboon, 2019;
Hsieh et al., 2015; Larner, 2020). The orientation is tested with questions about date and time, memory
is tested with learning and recall of words such as names and addresses, language is tested with the fluency
of animal names and visuospatial function with clock drawing (Charernboon, 2019; Hsieh et al.,
174
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
2015; Larner, 2020). Its maximum score is 30, with 25 to 30 showing evidence that an individual has
signs of moderate to severe dementia and scores 21 to 24 showing that the individual has mild dementia
(Hsieh et al., 2015; Larner, 2020). The test comes from the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III
(ACE-III) and its predecessor, the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-Revised (ACE-R) (Hsieh et al.,
2015). Despite the fact that the ACE III is widely used in memory clinics around the world, it is a lengthy
test that takes ~30 minutes to administer and includes tasks to assess memory, attention, language, and
visuospatial abilities; it is not recommended for testing in busy hospitals or memory clinics (Charernboon,
2019; Larner, 2020). Therefore, its shorter version, Mini-ACE, is preferred. The Mini-ACE has
predicted validity, specificity and sensitivity in screening for dementia, and it has been translated into
many languages (Charernboon, 2019; Hsieh et al., 2015; Kourtesis et al., 2020; Qassem et al., 2020, 2021).
The test is useful in examining and monitoring patients with milder cognitive impairments in clinical
settings, and it can produce some level of distinction between cognitive profiles (Beishon et al., 2019;
Hsieh et al., 2015). However, research has revealed answer variability, such as false positives, among
MCI and dementia patients, which may affect interpretation (Beishon et al., 2019; Hsieh et al., 2015).
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a 10-minute test that assesses short-term and working
memory, visuospatial abilities, attention, executive functions, language, and orientation (Dautzenberg
et al., 2020; Poptsi et al., 2019). The visuospatial and executive functions are tested with numbers and
letters to be connected in order, and with clock drawing. Object naming is tested through animal drawing.
Memory is tested with learning and recall of a list of words. Attention is tested through forward, and
backwards recall of numbers, recognition of letters and calculations. Language is tested with sentence
repetition and word naming. Abstract thinking is tested by understanding the similarities between words.
Delayed recall is tested with the recall of words. Orientation is tested with the current date and place
(Dautzenberg et al., 2020; Nasreddine et al., 2005). This assessment has shown evidence of distinguishing
between MCI and early AD (Dautzenberg et al., 2020; Nasreddine et al., 2005). The scores range from
0 to 30. AD has been identified with scores ~16, MCI in scores ~22, with scores above 26 to be considered
normal (Dautzenberg et al., 2020). The test has demonstrated diagnostic utility in differentiating
between patients with MCI, dementia and patients’ normal cognitive processes, and thus, it is claimed
that it can better detect patients in the early stages of cognitive impairment (Fasnacht et al., 2022; Ng
et al., 2013). However, there are issues with using the same cut-off scores in some countries when, for
example, culture is not taken into account in normative data scores (Fasnacht et al., 2022; Ng et al., 2013).
The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) is a digital test that evaluates abstract reasoning, strategic
planning, concept formation, organised searching and identifies executive function deficits (Kopp et al.,
2021; Nyhus & Barceló, 2009; Takeda et al., 2010). The patient is required to match cards to a set of
reference cards based on shape, colour and number of stimuli presented in each card (Kopp et al., 2021;
Nyhus & Barceló, 2009; Takeda et al., 2010). The geometric figures on the cards vary in number, shape,
and colour (Kopp et al., 2021; Nyhus & Barceló, 2009). The patients are required to use trial and error
to determine the correct principle and take 20 to 30 minutes to administer (Kopp et al., 2021; Nyhus
& Barceló, 2009). The test results are digital psychometric scores that indicate whether a patient has
acquired a brain injury and has a neurodegenerative disease based on normative data. WCST has shown
evidence that it can differentiate between early dementia and severe dementia stages, considering the
performance of healthy individuals on the test (Bondi et al., 1993). The WCST is valid and reliable in
diagnosing dementia and is used in many countries and languages (Kopp et al., 2021; Paolo et al., 1996).
The test’s strengths include the ability to assess cognitive flexibility, abstraction, decision-making, reasoning,
and information processing (Kopp et al., 2021; Miles et al., 2021). However, there are issues and
175
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
difficulties in testing, scoring, interpreting, and comparing results (Kopp et al., 2021; Miles et al., 2021).
The reason for this inconvenience is that some responses may be correct or incorrect when switching
the selection card category. This happens when the chosen stimulus card matches the response card on
a different rule that is not used (e.g., select shapes instead of numbers). As a result, these responses are
ambiguous and biased (Kopp et al., 2021; Miles et al., 2021).
The Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) evaluates episodic memory, verbal, and repeated
learning, encoding, retrieval and verbal memory and delayed recall (Andersson et al., 2006; Ricci et al.,
2012; Schmidt, 1996). The patients are required to learn a list of 15 words and repeat them in 5 trials.
Then they must repeat a new list of words they learned in one trial, followed by recalling the first list
of words (Schmidt, 1996). The test can discriminate between amnestic MCI and dementia and between
dementia and healthy individuals (Andersson et al., 2006; Ricci et al., 2012). The scoring is based on
individual cut-off scores for each country and demographic group. The test has shown evidence of discriminating
between healthy individuals and people with dementia based on recall scores (Drolet et al.,
2014), also AD and FTD based on recognition scores (van den Berg et al., 2020). The RAVLT is reliable
and valid in screening assessments for dementia, and it has been translated into many languages (Fichman
et al., 2010; Jafari et al., 2010; Messinis et al., 2016). The advantages of this test include its ability
to indicate cognitive impairment, assess the relationship between memory and learning in patients, and
differentiate between different types of dementia (Fard et al., 2016; Schoenberg et al., 2006; van den
Berg et al., 2020). However, the test results do not ensure sufficient data to create profiles of cognitive
deficits (Fard et al., 2016; Schoenberg et al., 2006; van den Berg et al., 2020).
The California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT) measures short and long-delay recall, recognition,
episodic verbal learning, memory and encoding (Elwood, 1995; Libon et al., 1996). The patients are
required to recall a list of 16 words in 5 trials. Because each word belongs to a semantic category, such
as tools, fruits, clothes, spices, and herbs, patients can group the words in each category to help them
remember them (Elwood, 1995; Libon et al., 1996). Following trial 5, a new list of words with fruit,
spice and herb, fish, and kitchen utensil words is presented. The patients are then asked to recognise
words from a 44-word list that is read aloud to them. The words that do not belong to the learning list
words are distractors, some of which belong to the same semantic categories, and others sound similar
(Elwood, 1995). After learning the words, the patients are unaware that a recall and recognition task
is required. The test has been simplified for people with dementia to a 9-word list version because the
original version was deemed too difficult for old people and people who may have dementia (Libon et
al., 1996). The scoring is determined using normative datasets. According to the literature, people with
AD make many errors during the test, indicating semantic memory impairment (Libon et al., 1996). The
test can also predict early cognitive impairments associated with semantic memory deficits in individuals
(Lekeu et al., 2010). The CVLT is reliable and valid in dementia diagnosis and has been translated
into many languages (Alioto et al., 2017; García-Herranz et al., 2022). The test is sensitive in measuring
episodic memory, it can detect changes in MCI to dementia, and it can be used to monitor the dementia
stages (Fox et al., 1998; Lekeu et al., 2010). It is, however, said to be a cognitively demanding test for
dementia patients, and more cognitive tests must be added to the cognitive assessment to provide information
about cognitive profiles and deficits (Fox et al., 1998; Lekeu et al., 2010).
The Boston Naming Test assesses visual naming ability with black-and-white line drawings (Harry
& Crowe, 2014; Hawkins & Bender, 2002). 60 black line drawings/pictures aim to identify the level of
word-finding ability in patients, and they are presented from the easiest to name to the most difficult
(Harry & Crowe, 2014; Hawkins & Bender, 2002). Each picture is shown one at a time in order, and
176
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
the patient is required to name the item shown in each picture in 20 seconds (Harry & Crowe, 2014;
Hawkins & Bender, 2002). The scoring is based on correctly identifying the drawings, and normative
data is provided for correct results (Aniwattanapong et al., 2019; Harry & Crowe, 2014; Hawkins &
Bender, 2002; Rami et al., 2008; Ross et al., 1995). Based on the literature the Boston Naming Test can
differentiate between MCI and dementia, especially AD (Balthazar et al., 2008). It is reliable and valid
and has many translations (Aniwattanapong et al., 2019; Patricacou et al., 2007). The test’s strength is that
it can identify language processing issues because it focuses on naming ability (Harry & Crowe, 2014;
Tallberg, 2005). Nonetheless, some studies claim that this test may not be the best cognitive assessment
to use on its own due to variations in response patterns that may cause interpretation difficulties (Harry
& Crowe, 2014; Tallberg, 2005).
The Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog) measures cognitive abilities
(Connor & Sabbagh, 2008; Kueper et al., 2018). The assessments include: a word recall task (learn 10
words from cards and recall them in 3 trials), a commands task (carry out 5 commands in 1 to 5 steps),
a constructional praxis task (copy 4 geometric forms), a delayed word recall task (recall the 10 words
previously learned in word recall task), a naming task (name 12 presented real objects and the fingers of
their dominant hand), an ideational praxis task (follow instructions), an orientation task (answer question
about time, place and self), comprehension of spoken language, spoken language ability, word-finding
difficulty, remembering test instructions and a word recognition task (learn 12 words and recognise
them in a list of distractors) (Connor & Sabbagh, 2008; Kueper et al., 2018). During scoring, each item
in each task is assessed for its correctness/errors and comprehension of spoken language (understanding
the examiner’s instructions and communications), word-finding difficulties, spoken language skills and
concentration (Connor & Sabbagh, 2008; Kueper et al., 2018; Verma et al., 2015). The test was one of
the first to be developed to assess the severity of cognitive impairment and mild to severe AD stages
(Hannesdóttir & Snaedal, 2002; Kueper et al., 2018; Nogueira et al., 2018). The test is a good predictor
of dementia and pre-dementia syndrome diagnoses, such as MCI (Benge et al., 2009; Hannesdóttir
& Snaedal, 2002; Kueper et al., 2018; Ulbl & Rakusa, 2021). It is reliable and valid, and it has been
translated into many languages (Chu et al., 2000). The test’s strength is its ability to identify changes
in early AD as more items are added (Kueper et al., 2018; Podhorna et al., 2016). Because the test can
alter individual result performance and introduce heterogeneity, changes are required to be efficiently
employed in diagnostic procedures (Kueper et al., 2018; Podhorna et al., 2016).
The Cambridge neuropsychological test automated battery (CANTAB) is a computer-based assessment
of various tests that measure motor skills, executive functions, episodic and visual memory,
information processing and sustained attention, valid in diagnosing dementia and translated in many
languages (CANTAB® [Cognitive assessment software], 2019, 2022). CANTAB has validated tests to
assess prodromal AD and MCI, such as the Motor Screening Task, Reaction Time task, Paired Associates
Learning test, Spatial Working Memory task, Pattern Recognition Memory task, Delayed Matching to
Sample test, and Rapid Visual Information Processing test (CANTAB® [Cognitive assessment software],
2022). CANTAB also offers the following tests to distinguish mild to moderate AD: the Motor Screening
Task, Reaction Time task, Paired Associates Learning task, and Spatial Working Memory (CANTAB®
[Cognitive assessment software], 2022). Each test can be completed in 2 to 8 minutes. The cut-off scores
for each group are provided for each CANTAB test using normative data, and they are based on studies
done to identify dementia in individuals using neuropsychological markers (De Jager et al., 2005; Égerházi
et al., 2007; Swainson et al., 2001). CANTAB tests can differentiate between MCI and AD, with
procedures based on digital testing that are flexible for clinicians during assessments (Blackwell et al.,
177
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
2004; Égerházi et al., 2007; Gualtieri, 2004). However, their weaknesses are that each one tests specific
cognitive functions, and each test is not enough alone to contribute to diagnostic procedures (Blackwell
et al., 2004; Égerházi et al., 2007; Gualtieri, 2004).
The Clock Drawing Test assesses visual-spatial, planning and numerical sequencing skills, as well
as long-term attention, concentration, auditory processes and memory, is reliable and valid in dementia
diagnosis, and it has been translated into many languages (Asl et al., 2018; Budson & Solomon, 2016;
Konstam & Lehmann, 2011; Yap et al., 2007). The patient draws a clock with numbers and clock hands
on a piece of paper and places the clock hands at a specific time (Budson & Solomon, 2016; Konstam
& Lehmann, 2011). The scoring is based on a 10-point scale and takes into account the 12 numbers
written on the clock, the size of the clock, the position of the clock hands, the requested hour, the manner
in which the figure was drawn, such as graphical errors (Khan, 2016). The test has demonstrated
sensitivity in detecting dementia, particularly in its early stages (Budson & Solomon, 2016). The test,
however, cannot distinguish between MCI and early AD, but it can distinguish between moderate and
severe AD (Khan, 2016). The strength of the test is that it is a robust screening method for both moderate
and severe dementia types (Pinto & Peters, 2009). Evidence suggests the test’s weakness is its inability
to distinguish between persons with mild and ambiguous dementia (Pinto & Peters, 2009).
All tests should be administered by a clinical neuropsychologist or another experienced clinician
who is a psychometrics expert (Hebben & Milberg, 2009). Furthermore, the examiners must know how
to proceed with the testing before each test begins; for example, they must know and be prepared for
all sessions (Hebben & Milberg, 2009; Wilson & Betteridge, 2019). Clinicians must also clearly speak
and communicate the instructions for each test (Hebben & Milberg, 2009). They are also permitted to
encourage, motivate, and reinforce the examinees’ efforts to complete each test (Wilson & Betteridge,
2019). However, it is noteworthy to mention that patients should not view all test kits before testing to
reduce bias during data scoring and interpretation (Hebben & Milberg, 2009).
IMPORTANCE OF TIMELY DIAGNOSIS
Receiving a dementia diagnosis on time may be critical for patients to access patient care, support, pharmacotherapy,
counselling interventions, and information about their disease progression (Cummings et
al., 2019; Downing et al., 2013; Sadowsky & Galvin, 2012). Early diagnosis also benefits families and
caregivers because it allows them to make decisions while the patients can still think clearly (Davies et
al., 2021). This is a critical step because people with dementia lose the ability to make decisions about
their own lives (Davies et al., 2021). Furthermore, the key to diagnosing dementia is assessing the patients’
cognitive skills (Hsieh et al., 2015). The cognitive impairment diagnosis then leads to access to
therapy plans in healthcare (Hsieh et al., 2015).
Even though neuropsychological assessments do not diagnose an individual independently, they
are required to support the diagnosis and prognosis and provide information that will lead to the most
appropriate treatment plans. Their advantage is that they can detect cognitive deficits caused by brain
damage or dysfunction. Each country assesses MCI and dementia using neuropsychological tests licenced
to its national health institutes. In the United Kingdom, for example, the National Health Service (NHS)
employs the General Practitioner Assessment of Cognition (GPCOG) test, which detects cognitive impairment
in individuals but cannot distinguish between groups, such as MCI and dementia (National Health
Service, 2020a). Moreover, the most common dementia assessments in the Australian healthcare system
178
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
are the MMSE and ADAS-Cog (Dementia Australia, 2022). Also, clinics and hospitals in the United
States use the MMSE and Mini-Cog test, which measure word repetition, recall, and clock drawing, as
quick screening procedures to detect MCI and early dementia (Mini-Cog©, 2022).
Some neuropsychological tests can distinguish between dementia types (Matias-Guiu et al., 2017;
Sá et al., 2012; Seo et al., 2010; Yassuda et al., 2010). For example, there is evidence that the RAVLT
can differentiate between AD and FTR (Ricci et al., 2012). The RAVLT reveals more pronounced encoding
and retrieval problems in FTD patients than in AD patients and more false positive errors in AD
patients than in FTD patients (Ricci et al., 2012). The same test may also distinguish between AD and
Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) by revealing more errors in recall in PDD than AD and more errors
in recognition in AD than in PDD (Tierney et al., 1994). Furthermore, the CVLT demonstrates that
AD patients make more errors than other dementia patients, indicating a stronger association between
semantic memory impairment and AD (Davis et al., 2002).
It is important to remember that caring for people with dementia includes many growing responsibilities
for healthcare providers and caregivers (Etters et al., 2008; Jönsson & Wimo, 2009). The cost of treating
and monitoring dementia is high worldwide, posing a financial burden for families, healthcare insurance
and hospitals (Etters et al., 2008; Jönsson & Wimo, 2009; Kerwin et al., 2022; Tahami Monfared et al.,
2022). According to health economic analysts, the annual costs of screening and monitoring dementia
in a patient range from $4.000 to $10.000 in developed countries and ~$1.000 in low-income countries,
depending on how mild or severe each case is (Mattap et al., 2022). In either case, the economic burden
on each country can be enormous, causing delayed screening, diagnostic, and treatment procedures
because the number of people with dementia increases over the years (Mattap et al., 2022). As a result,
solutions and interventions are required to alleviate the heavy load in each household, such as software
applications and digitalised cognitive assessments (Bojan et al., 2022).
However, there are limitations considering neuropsychological testing. Emotions and feelings that
may bias the screening results and interpretation are usually not meticulously investigated during neuropsychological
testing assessments (Howieson, 2019). Another limitation of the tests is that the information
they provide about cognitive profiles is based on specific cognitive domains that they test, which
may not be the cognitive domains in which the individual is experiencing symptoms. The Mini-ACE,
for example, can distinguish dementia from MCI in individuals with AD and FTD due to memory and
language assessments that appear to be impaired in these syndromes (Hsieh et al., 2015). Therefore,
there may be issues when using Mini-ACE to screen individuals with dementia symptoms due to causes
different from AD and FTD, such as vascular disease.
Moreover, the MMSE is a popular cognitive test in healthcare because it is simple and quick to administer
and for this reason, it has been used in academia, industry, hospitals, and memory clinics during
screening procedures. When compared to other dementia scales, such as the Clinical Dementia Rating
(CDR), the MMSE may be a good measure for identifying a healthy brain and signs of early dementia
(Perneczky et al., 2006). However, it is regarded as a poor test for detecting MCI from early dementia.
The fact that most neuropsychological tests are copyrighted and can be purchased online is a significant
limitation of using them in healthcare. As a result, some countries may be unable to purchase
licences for the most commonly used neuropsychological tests to aid in diagnosing MCI and dementia.
Naturally, there are some reservations about the limitations and boundaries associated with purchasing
assessment tests. Patients may receive an incorrect diagnosis, their medical treatments and therapies
may be delayed or non-existent, and their quality of life may deteriorate over a period of months to years
(Howieson, 2019).
179
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Furthermore, some neuropsychological tests may have ambiguous measurement interpretations and
no normative data to compare patients’ performance to groups of people in their demographic categories
(Howieson, 2019). Even if there are indications of cut-off scores pointing to specific diagnoses,
cultural differences may fail to provide correct interpretations, increasing the possibility of false positive
diagnoses (Howieson, 2019). This is especially true for neuropsychological tests developed in Western
cultures and administered in Eastern cultures without normative data catalogues.
SOLUTIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Neuropsychological testing may be biased due to the limitations and lack of cut-off scores based on
cultural differences and identifying emotional and mental state factors that affect testing (Howieson,
2019). Therefore, researchers must modify and improve tests in various languages (Howieson, 2019).
Furthermore, neuropsychological testing may adopt new and modern psychometric approaches in order
to become adaptable to different countries and cultures, as well as effective and efficient in accurate
diagnosis (Bilder & Reise, 2019). To correctly interpret the results, cultural characteristics such as race,
ethnicity, acculturation, socioeconomic status, and education should be added to the normative data
categories (Howieson, 2019).
Future research may determine the risk factors for individuals developing MCI or dementia (Kivipelto
et al., 2020). For example, individuals with hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and vascular issues may be
at a high risk of developing mild to severe cognitive impairment due to health issues (Kivipelto et al.,
2020). Furthermore, future research may investigate various interventions, such as how lifestyle factors
like physical activity and a healthy diet may improve brain functions (Kivipelto et al., 2018, 2020).
Since there is no research to support the prevention of cognitive impairment through pharmacotherapy,
alternative cognitive interventions, such as cognitive simulation and training, might be promising prevention
methods in individuals with cognitive impairment as well as healthy individuals (Fink et al., 2018;
Gates et al., 2019). Although various solutions assist in reducing the effect of cognitive symptoms, future
research could focus on the benefits of personalised and guided study designs to identify biomarkers,
risk factors and which interventions are best for each patient (Fink et al., 2018). Based on the above,
neuropsychological testing might be adjusted to differentiate cognitive impairment due to MCI and
dementia neuropathological profiles due to poor diet, vitamin deficiency, medication side effects etc.
CONCLUSION
A growing body of research discusses neuropsychological evaluations for cognitive decline in normal
ageing, MCI, and dementia. Memory, attention, orientation, executive functions, reasoning, thinking,
language abilities and many more cognitive skills are well assessed. Because each test chooses to investigate
cognitive impairment in specific cognitive functions, no neuropsychological test can assist in
screening and diagnosing an individual with signs of cognitive decline on its own. Typically, multiple
assessments are performed in conjunction with brain scans and blood tests to provide accurate results.
Patients’ neuropsychological test scores worsen as their brain health deteriorates, and this has been
imprinted in normative data categories and cut-off scores. The most important advantage of these tests
is that they identify specific patient profiles and categorise cognitive deficits as mild, moderate, or se180
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
vere, depending on the score. However, not all tests have normative data to compare against, and some
cut-off scores have yet to be adjusted for different languages and cultures. As a result of the foregoing,
many implications emerge, such as delayed correct diagnosis, receiving appropriate treatment, and being
involved in overall decision-making in one’s own life. Overall, the benefits of using neuropsychological
assessments in individuals with cognitive deterioration are critical in understanding the patients’ needs
and implementing appropriate interventions to alleviate the negative impact of their symptoms.
REFERENCES
Alexopoulos, P., Grimmer, T., Perneczky, R., Domes, G., & Kurz, A. (2006). Progression to dementia
in clinical subtypes of mild cognitive impairment. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 22(1),
27–34. doi:10.1159/000093101 PMID:16679762
Alioto, A. G., Kramer, J. H., Borish, S., Neuhaus, J., Saloner, R., Wynn, M., & Foley, J. M. (2017).
Long-term test-retest reliability of the California Verbal Learning Test–second edition. The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 31(8), 1449–1458. doi:10.1080/13854046.2017.1310300 PMID:28387582
Alzheimer’s Association. (2022). 10 Early Signs and Symptoms of Alzheimer’s. Alzheimer’s Association.
https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/10_signs
Alzheimer’s Society. (2016). Fix Dementia Care: NHS and Care Homes. Alzheimer’s Association.
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/sites/default/files/migrate/downloads/fix_dementia_care_nhs_and_care_
homes_report.pdf
American Psychiatric Association. (2022). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5-TRTM) (Fifth Edit). APA.
Amieva, H., Lafont, S., Auriacombe, S., Rainville, C., Orgogozo, J.-M., Dartigues, J.-F., & Fabrigoule, C.
(1998). Analysis of error types in the Trail Making Test evidences an inhibitory deficit in dementia of the
Alzheimer type. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 20(2), 280–285. doi:10.1076/
jcen.20.2.280.1161 PMID:9777482
Andersson, C., Lindau, M., Almkvist, O., Engfeldt, P., Johansson, S.-E., & Jönhagen, M. E. (2006).
Identifying patients at high and low risk of cognitive decline using Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test
among middle-aged memory clinic outpatients. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 21(4),
251–259. doi:10.1159/000091398 PMID:16465053
Aniwattanapong, D., Tangwongchai, S., Supasitthumrong, T., Hemrunroj, S., Tunvirachaisakul, C.,
Tawankanjanachot, I., Chuchuen, P., Snabboon, T., Carvalho, A. F., & Maes, M. (2019). Validation of
the Thai version of the short Boston Naming Test (T-BNT) in patients with Alzheimer’s dementia and
mild cognitive impairment: Clinical and biomarker correlates. Aging & Mental Health, 23(7), 840–850.
doi:10.1080/13607863.2018.1501668 PMID:30351202
Arevalo‐Rodriguez, I., & Smailagic, N., i Figuls, M. R., Ciapponi, A., Sanchez‐Perez, E., Giannakou,
A., Pedraza, O. L., Cosp, X. B., & Cullum, S. (2015). Mini‐Mental State Examination (MMSE) for the
detection of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 3. PMID:25740785
181
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Ashendorf, L., Jefferson, A. L., O’Connor, M. K., Chaisson, C., Green, R. C., & Stern, R. A. (2008).
Trail Making Test errors in normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia. Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology, 23(2), 129–137. doi:10.1016/j.acn.2007.11.005 PMID:18178372
Asl, A. M., Mehdizadeh, M., Roudbari, P. R., Habibi, S.-A., Khatoon, J. N., & Taghizadeh, G. (2018).
Reliability and validity of the Persian version of the clock drawing test in Iranian patients with idiopathic
Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Clinical Physiotherapy Research, 3(2), 78–81.
Auning, E., Rongve, A., Fladby, T., Booij, J., Hortobágyi, T., Siepel, F. J., Ballard, C., & Aarsland, D.
(2011). Early and presenting symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 32(3), 202–208. doi:10.1159/000333072 PMID:22095040
Baek, M. J., Kim, K., Park, Y. H., & Kim, S. (2016). The validity and reliability of the mini-mental state
examination-2 for detecting mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease in a Korean population.
PLoS One, 11(9), e0163792. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0163792 PMID:27668883
Balthazar, M. L. F., Cendes, F., & Damasceno, B. P. (2008). Semantic error patterns on the Boston
Naming Test in normal aging, amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and mild Alzheimer’s disease: Is
there semantic disruption? Neuropsychology, 22(6), 703–709. doi:10.1037/a0012919 PMID:18999343
Beishon, L. C., Batterham, A. P., Quinn, T. J., Nelson, C. P., Panerai, R. B., Robinson, T., & Haunton,
V. J. (2019). Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III (ACE‐III) and mini‐ACE for the detection of
dementia and mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 12. PMID:31846066
Benge, J. F., Balsis, S., Geraci, L., Massman, P. J., & Doody, R. S. (2009). How well do the ADAS-cog
and its subscales measure cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease? Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 28(1), 63–69. doi:10.1159/000230709 PMID:19641319
Bilder, R. M., & Reise, S. P. (2019). Neuropsychological tests of the future: How do we get there from here?
The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 33(2), 220–245. doi:10.1080/13854046.2018.1521993 PMID:30422045
Blackwell, A. D., Sahakian, B. J., Vesey, R., Semple, J. M., Robbins, T. W., & Hodges, J. R. (2004).
Detecting dementia: Novel neuropsychological markers of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia
and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 17(1–2), 42–48. doi:10.1159/000074081 PMID:14560064
Bojan, K., Christogianni, A., & Mukaetova-Ladinska, E. (2022). The Role of Serious Games in Healthcare
and Its Contribution to the Healthcare Ecosystem: Serious Games vs. Wearables. In Handbook of
Research on Promoting Economic and Social Development Through Serious Games (pp. 118–139). IGI
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-9732-3.ch007
Bondi, M. W., Monsch, A. U., Butters, N., Salmon, D. P., & Paulsen, J. S. (1993). Utility of a modified
version of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in the detection of dementia of the Alzheimer type. Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 7(2), 161–170. doi:10.1080/13854049308401518 PMID:29022479
Bowie, C. R., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Administration and interpretation of the Trail Making Test. Nature
Protocols, 1(5), 2277–2281. doi:10.1038/nprot.2006.390 PMID:17406468
182
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Budson, A. E., & Solomon, P. R. (2016). Chapter 2 - Evaluating the Patient with Memory Loss or Dementia.
In A. E. Budson & P. R. Solomon (Eds.), Memory Loss, Alzheimer’s Disease, and Dementia
(Second Edition) (Second Edi, pp. 5–38). Elsevier.
Campbell, D. (2013). Normative data. In Encyclopedia of Autism Spectrum Disorders. Springer New
York, NY.
Cangöz, B., Demirci, S., & Uluc, S. (2013). Trail Making Test: Predictive Validity Study On Turkish
Patients With Alzheimer Dementia. Turkish Journal of Geriatrics/Türk Geriatri Dergisi, 16(1).
CANTAB® [Cognitive assessment software]. (2019). Cognitive Cognition. All rights reserved. www.
cantab.com
CANTAB® [Cognitive assessment software]. (2022). Alzheimer’s disease. https://www.cambridgecognition.
com/cantab/test-batteries/alzheimers-disease/
Charernboon, T. (2019). Diagnostic accuracy of the Thai version of the Mini‐Addenbrooke’s Cognitive
Examination as a mild cognitive impairment and dementia screening test. Psychogeriatrics, 19(4), 340–344.
Choe, J. Y., Youn, J. C., Park, J. H., Park, I. S., Jeong, J. W., Lee, W. H., Lee, S. B., Park, Y. S., Jhoo, J.
H., & Lee, D. Y. (2008). The Severe Cognitive Impairment Rating Scale–an instrument for the assessment
of cognition in moderate to severe dementia patients. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders,
25(4), 321–328.
Chu, L. W., Chiu, K. C., Hui, S. L., Yu, G. K., Tsui, W. J., & Lee, P. W. (2000). The reliability and validity
of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) among the elderly
Chinese in Hong Kong. Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore, 29(4), 474–485.
Connor, D. J., & Sabbagh, M. N. (2008). Administration and scoring variance on the ADAS-Cog. Journal
of Alzheimer’s Disease, 15(3), 461–464.
Cummings, J. L., Tong, G., & Ballard, C. (2019). Treatment combinations for Alzheimer’s disease: Current
and future pharmacotherapy options. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 67(3), 779–794.
Dautzenberg, G., Lijmer, J., & Beekman, A. (2020). Diagnostic accuracy of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(MoCA) for cognitive screening in old age psychiatry: Determining cutoff scores in clinical
practice. Avoiding spectrum bias caused by healthy controls. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
35(3), 261–269.
Davey, R. J., & Jamieson, S. (2004). The validity of using the mini mental state examination in NICE
dementia guidelines. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 75(2), 343–344.
Davies, N., De Souza, T., Rait, G., Meehan, J., & Sampson, E. L. (2021). Developing an applied model
for making decisions towards the end of life about care for someone with dementia. PLoS One, 16(5),
e0252464.
Davis, K. L., Price, C. C., Kaplan, E., & Libon, D. J. (2002). Error analysis of the nine-word California
Verbal Learning Test (CVLT-9) among older adults with and without dementia. The Clinical Neuropsychologist,
16(1), 81–89.
183
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
De Jager, C., Blackwell, A. D., Budge, M. M., & Sahakian, B. J. (2005). Predicting cognitive decline in
healthy older adults. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13(8), 735–740.
Dementia Australia. (2022). Tests used in diagnosing dementia. Dementia Australia. https://www.
dementia.org.au/national/about-dementia/how-can-i-find-out-more/tests-used-in-diagnosing-dementia
Dening, T., & Sandilyan, M. B. (2015). Dementia: definitions and types. Nursing Standard, 29(37), 37.
Dodds, R. M., Syddall, H. E., Cooper, R., Benzeval, M., Deary, I. J., Dennison, E. M., Der, G., Gale, C.
R., Inskip, H. M., & Jagger, C. (2014). Grip strength across the life course: Normative data from twelve
British studies. PLoS One, 9(12), e113637.
Downing, L. J., Caprio, T. V., & Lyness, J. M. (2013). Geriatric psychiatry review: Differential diagnosis
and treatment of the 3 D’s-delirium, dementia, and depression. Current Psychiatry Reports, 15(6), 1–10.
Drolet, V., Vallet, G. T., Imbeault, H., Lecomte, S., Limoges, F., Joubert, S., & Rouleau, I. (2014). A
comparison of the performances between healthy older adults and persons with Alzheimer’s disease on
the Rey auditory verbal learning test and the Test de rappel libre/rappel indicé 16 items. Gériatrie et
Psychologie Neuropsychiatrie du Vieillissement, 12(2), 218–226.
Égerházi, A., Berecz, R., Bartók, E., & Degrell, I. (2007). Automated Neuropsychological Test Battery
(CANTAB) in mild cognitive impairment and in Alzheimer’s disease. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
& Biological Psychiatry, 31(3), 746–751.
Elwood, R. W. (1995). The California Verbal Learning Test: Psychometric characteristics and clinical
application. Neuropsychology Review, 5(3), 173–201.
Epstein-Lubow, G., & Fulton, A. T. (2012). Post-hospital transitions for individuals with moderate to
severe cognitive impairment. The Annals of Long-Term Care: the Official Journal of the American
Medical Directors Association, 20(3).
Etters, L., Goodall, D., & Harrison, B. E. (2008). Caregiver burden among dementia patient caregivers: A
review of the literature. In Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. doi:10.1111/j.1745-
7599.2008.00342.x
Evans, T. E., Adams, H. H. H., Licher, S., Wolters, F. J., van der Lugt, A., Ikram, M. K., O’Sullivan,
M. J., Vernooij, M. W., & Ikram, M. A. (2018). Subregional volumes of the hippocampus in relation to
cognitive function and risk of dementia. NeuroImage, 178, 129–135.
Fard, E. K., Keelor, J. L., Bagheban, A. A., & Keith, R. W. (2016). Comparison of the Rey Auditory
Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) and digit test among typically achieving and gifted students. Iranian
Journal of Child Neurology, 10(2), 26.
Fasnacht, J. S., Wueest, A. S., Berres, M., Thomann, A. E., Krumm, S., Gutbrod, K., Steiner, L. A.,
Goettel, N., & Monsch, A. U. (2022). Conversion between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and the
Mini‐Mental Status Examination. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society.
Fichman, H. C., Dias, L. B. T., Fernandes, C. S., Lourenço, R., Caramelli, P., & Nitrini, R. (2010).
Normative data and construct validity of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in a Brazilian elderly
population. Psychology & Neuroscience, 3, 79–84.
184
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Fink, H. A., Jutkowitz, E., McCarten, J. R., Hemmy, L. S., Butler, M., Davila, H., Ratner, E., Calvert,
C., Barclay, T. R., & Brasure, M. (2018). Pharmacologic interventions to prevent cognitive decline, mild
cognitive impairment, and clinical Alzheimer-type dementia: A systematic review. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 168(1), 39–51.
Fox, L. S., Olin, J. T., Erblich, J., Ippen, C. G., & Schneider, L. S. (1998). Severity of cognitive impairment
in Alzheimer’s disease affects list learning using the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT).
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13(8), 544–549.
García-Herranz, S., Díaz-Mardomingo, M. del C., Suárez-Falcón, J. C., Rodríguez-Fernández, R., Peraita,
H., & Venero, C. (2022). Normative data for the Spanish version of the California Verbal Learning Test
(TAVEC) from older adults. Psychological Assessment, 34(1), 91.
Gates, N. J., Vernooij, R. W. M., Di Nisio, M., Karim, S., March, E., Martínez, G., & Rutjes, A. W. S.
(2019). Computerised cognitive training for preventing dementia in people with mild cognitive impairment.
In Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD012279.pub2
Gualtieri, C. T. (2004). Dementia screening using computerized tests. Journal Of Insurance Medicine-
New York Then Denver, 36, 213–227.
Güngen, C., Ertan, T., Eker, E., Yaşar, R., & Engin, F. (2002). Reliability and validity of the standardized
Mini Mental State Examination in the diagnosis of mild dementia in Turkish population. Turkish
Journal of Psychiatry, 13(4), 273–281.
Han, E.-J., Lee, J., Cho, E., & Kim, H. (2021). Socioeconomic costs of dementia based on utilization
of health care and long-term-care services: A retrospective cohort study. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 18(2), 376.
Hannesdóttir, K., & Snaedal, J. (2002). A study of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive
(ADAS-Cog) in an Icelandic elderly population. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 56(3), 201–206.
Harry, A., & Crowe, S. F. (2014). Is the Boston Naming Test still fit for purpose? The Clinical Neuropsychologist,
28(3), 486–504.
Hawkins, K. A., & Bender, S. (2002). Norms and the relationship of Boston Naming Test performance
to vocabulary and education: A review. Aphasiology, 16(12), 1143–1153.
Hebben, N., & Milberg, W. (2009). Essentials of neuropsychological assessment. John Wiley & Sons.
Hettinga, M., De Boer, J., Goldberg, E., & Moelaert, F. (2009). Navigation for people with mild dementia.
MIE, 428–432.
Howieson, D. (2019). Current limitations of neuropsychological tests and assessment procedures. The
Clinical Neuropsychologist, 33(2), 200–208.
Hsieh, S., McGrory, S., Leslie, F., Dawson, K., Ahmed, S., Butler, C. R., Rowe, J. B., Mioshi, E., &
Hodges, J. R. (2015). The Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination: A new assessment tool for
dementia. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 39(1–2), 1–11.
185
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Iizuka, T., Iizuka, R., & Kameyama, M. (2017). Cingulate island sign temporally changes in dementia
with Lewy bodies. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1–9.
Jacobs, H. I. L., Van Boxtel, M. P. J., Jolles, J., Verhey, F. R. J., & Uylings, H. B. M. (2012). Parietal
cortex matters in Alzheimer’s disease: An overview of structural, functional and metabolic findings.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(1), 297–309.
Jacova, C., Kertesz, A., Blair, M., Fisk, J. D., & Feldman, H. H. (2007). Neuropsychological testing and
assessment for dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 3(4), 299–317.
Jafari, Z., Moritz, P. S., Zandi, T., Kamrani, A. A. A., & Malayeri, S. (2010). Iranian version of the Rey
Auditory Verbal Learning Test: A validation study. [Health Monitor]. Payesh, 9(3), 307–316.
Jönsson, L., & Wimo, A. (2009). The cost of dementia in Europe. PharmacoEconomics, 27(5), 391–403.
Jorm, A. F. (1996). Assessment of cognitive impairment and dementia using informant reports. Clinical
Psychology Review, 16(1), 51–73. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0272-7358(95)00056-9
Kerwin, D., Abdelnour, C., Caramelli, P., Ogunniyi, A., Shi, J., Zetterberg, H., & Traber, M. (2022).
Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis and management: Perspectives from around the world. Alzheimer’s &
Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring, 14(1), e12334.
Khan, T. K. (2016). Clinical Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease. In T. K. Khan (Ed.), Biomarkers in
Alzheimer’s Disease (pp. 27–48). Academic Press. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
804832-0.00002-X.
Kivipelto, M., Mangialasche, F., & Ngandu, T. (2018). Lifestyle interventions to prevent cognitive impairment,
dementia and Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews. Neurology, 14(11), 653–666.
Kivipelto, M., Mangialasche, F., Snyder, H. M., Allegri, R., Andrieu, S., Arai, H., Baker, L., Belleville,
S., Brodaty, H., & Brucki, S. M. (2020). World‐Wide FINGERS Network: A global approach to risk
reduction and prevention of dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 16(7), 1078–1094.
Konstam, V., & Lehmann, I. (2011). Chapter 60 - Cognitive Impairment in Heart Failure. In D. L. Mann
(Ed.), Heart Failure: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease (Second Edition) (Second Edi, pp.
867–875). W.B. Saunders. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4160-5895-3.10060-9
Kopp, B., Lange, F., & Steinke, A. (2021). The reliability of the Wisconsin card sorting test in clinical
practice. Assessment, 28(1), 248–263.
Kourtesis, P., Margioti, E., Demenega, C., Christidi, F., & Abrahams, S. (2020). Addenbrooke Cognitive
Examination-III and detection of Alzheimer’s disease: A comparison of ACE-III, M-ACE and ECAS
in a Greek Alzheimer’s disease population. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society,
26(8), 825–834.
Kueper, J. K., Speechley, M., & Montero-Odasso, M. (2018). The Alzheimer’s disease assessment
scale–cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog): Modifications and responsiveness in pre-dementia populations.
a narrative review. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 63(2), 423–444.
186
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Kurlowicz, L., & Wallace, M. (1999). The mini-mental state examination (MMSE). Journal of Gerontological
Nursing, 25(5), 8–9.
Larner, A. J. (2020). Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (MACE): A useful cognitive screening
instrument in older people? Canadian Geriatrics Journal, 23(2), 199–204.
Lekeu, F., Magis, D., Marique, P., Delbeuck, X., Bechet, S., Guillaume, B., Adam, S., Petermans, J.,
Moonen, G., & Salmon, E. (2010). The California Verbal Learning Test and other standard clinical
neuropsychological tests to predict conversion from mild memory impairment to dementia. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 32(2), 164–173.
Libon, D. J., Mattson, R. E., Glosser, G., Kaplan, E., Malamut, B. L., Sands, L. P., Swenson, R., &
Cloud, B. S. (1996). A nine—Word dementia version of the California verbal learning test. The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 10(3), 237–244.
Linari, I., Juantorena, G. E., Ibáñez, A., Petroni, A., & Kamienkowski, J. E. (2022). Unveiling Trail
Making Test: Visual and manual trajectories indexing multiple executive processes. Scientific Reports,
12(1), 14265.
Matias-Guiu, J. A., Cortés-Martínez, A., Valles-Salgado, M., Rognoni, T., Fernández-Matarrubia, M.,
Moreno-Ramos, T., & Matías-Guiu, J. (2017). Addenbrooke’s cognitive examination III: Diagnostic
utility for mild cognitive impairment and dementia and correlation with standardized neuropsychological
tests. International Psychogeriatrics, 29(1), 105–113.
Mattap, S. M., Mohan, D., McGrattan, A. M., Allotey, P., Stephan, B. C. M., Reidpath, D. D., Siervo,
M., Robinson, L., & Chaiyakunapruk, N. (2022). The economic burden of dementia in low-and middleincome
countries (LMICs): A systematic review. BMJ Global Health, 7(4), e007409.
Messinis, L., Nasios, G., Mougias, A., Politis, A., Zampakis, P., Tsiamaki, E., Malefaki, S., Gourzis, P.,
& Papathanasopoulos, P. (2016). Age and education adjusted normative data and discriminative validity
for Rey’s Auditory Verbal Learning Test in the elderly Greek population. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 38(1), 23–39.
Miles, S., Howlett, C. A., Berryman, C., Nedeljkovic, M., Moseley, G. L., & Phillipou, A. (2021). Considerations
for using the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test to assess cognitive flexibility. Behavior Research
Methods, 53(5), 2083–2091.
Mini-Cog©. (2022). The Mini-Cog© is a fast and simple screening test to help detect dementia in its
early stages.Mini-Cog©. https://mini-cog.com/
Mitrushina, M., Boone, K. B., Razani, J., & D’Elia, L. F. (2005). Handbook of normative data for neuropsychological
assessment. Oxford University Press.
Monastero, R., Mangialasche, F., Camarda, C., Ercolani, S., & Camarda, R. (2009). A systematic review of
neuropsychiatric symptoms in mild cognitive impairment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 18(1), 11–30.
Nasreddine, Z. S., Phillips, N. A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I., Cummings,
J. L., & Chertkow, H. (2005). The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for
mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(4), 695–699.
187
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. (2018). The dementia care pathway: Full implementation
guidance. NCCMH. https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/docs/default-source/improving-care/nccmh/dementia/
nccmh-dementia-care-pathway-full-implementation-guidance.pdf?sfvrsn=cdef189d_8
National Health Service. (2020a). Tests for diagnosing dementia. NHS. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/
dementia/diagnosis-tests/
National Health Service. (2020b). What are the treatments for dementia? Dementia guide. NHS. https://
www.nhs.uk/conditions/dementia/treatment/
National Institute for Health an Care Excellence. (2018). Dementia: assessment, management and support
for people living with dementia and their carers. NICE Guideline [NG97]. https://www.nice.org.uk/
National Institute for Health an Care Excellence. (2021). Dementia. NIHCE. https://cks.nice.org.uk/
topics/dementia/
Ng, A., Chew, I., Narasimhalu, K., & Kandiah, N. (2013). Effectiveness of Montreal Cognitive Assessment
for the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease in Singapore.
Singapore Medical Journal, 54(11), 616–619.
Ning, H., Li, R., Ye, X., Zhang, Y., & Liu, L. (2020). A review on serious games for dementia care in
ageing societies. IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, 8, 1–11.
Nogueira, J., Freitas, S., Duro, D., Almeida, J., & Santana, I. (2018). Validation study of the Alzheimer’s
disease assessment scale–cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) for the Portuguese patients with mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 32(sup1), 46–59.
Nyhus, E., & Barceló, F. (2009). The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and the cognitive assessment of
prefrontal executive functions: A critical update. Brain and Cognition, 71(3), 437–451.
O’connor, P. J. (1990). Normative data: Their definition, interpretation, and importance for primary care
physicians. Family Medicine, 22(4), 307–311.
Pangman, V. C., Sloan, J., & Guse, L. (2000). An examination of psychometric properties of the Mini-
Mental State Examination and the standardized Mini-Mental State Examination: Implications for clinical
practice. Applied Nursing Research, 13(4), 209–213. https://doi.org/10.1053/apnr.2000.9231
Paolo, A. M., Tröster, A. I., Blackwell, K. T., Koller, W. C., & Axelrod, B. N. (1996). Utility of a Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test short form in persons with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 18(6), 892–897.
Patricacou, A., Psallida, E., Pring, T., & Dipper, L. (2007). The Boston Naming Test in Greek: Normative
data and the effects of age and education on naming. Aphasiology, 21(12), 1157–1170.
Perneczky, R., Wagenpfeil, S., Komossa, K., Grimmer, T., Diehl, J., & Kurz, A. (2006). Mapping scores
onto stages: Mini-mental state examination and clinical dementia rating. The American Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 14(2), 139–144.
Petersen, R. C. (2016). Mild cognitive impairment. CONTINUUM: Lifelong Learning in Neurology,
22(2 Dementia), 404.
188
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Pinto, E., & Peters, R. (2009). Literature review of the Clock Drawing Test as a tool for cognitive screening.
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 27(3), 201–213.
Podhorna, J., Krahnke, T., Shear, M., & Harrison, E, J. (2016). Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale–
Cognitive subscale variants in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease: Change over
time and the effect of enrichment strategies. Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy, 8(1), 1–13.
Poptsi, E., Moraitou, D., Eleftheriou, M., Kounti-Zafeiropoulou, F., Papasozomenou, C., Agogiatou, C.,
Bakoglidou, E., Batsila, G., Liapi, D., & Markou, N. (2019). Normative data for the Montreal Cognitive
Assessment in Greek older adults with subjective cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment and
dementia. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 32(5), 265–274.
Qassem, T., Khater, M. S., Emara, T., Rasheedy, D., Tawfik, H. M., Mohammedin, A. S., Tolba, M. F.,
El-Gabry, D. A., Aziz, K. A., & Saber, H. G. (2021). Validation of the Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive
Examination in Mild Cognitive Impairment in Arabic Speakers. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 50(2), 178–182.
Qassem, T., Khater, M. S., Emara, T., Rasheedy, D., Tawfik, H. M., Mohammedin, A. S., Tolba, M. F.,
Saber, H. G., El-Gabry, D. A., & Aziz, K. A. (2020). Adaptation and Validation of the Mini-Addenbrooke’s
Cognitive Examination in Dementia in Arabic Speakers in Egypt. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 49(6), 611–616.
Rami, L., Serradell, M., Bosch, B., Caprile, C., Sekler, A., Villar, A., Canal, R., & Molinuevo, J. L.
(2008). Normative data for the Boston Naming Test and the Pyramids and Palm Trees Test in the elderly
Spanish population. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 30(1), 1–6.
Rasmusson, X. D., Zonderman, A. B., Kawas, C., & Resnick, S. M. (1998). Effects of age and dementia
on the Trail Making Test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 12(2), 169–178.
Ricci, M., Graef, S., Blundo, C., & Miller, L. A. (2012). Using the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test
(RAVLT) to differentiate Alzheimer’s dementia and behavioural variant fronto-temporal dementia. The
Clinical Neuropsychologist, 26(6), 926–941.
Ross, T. P., Lichtenberg, P. A., & Christensen, B. K. (1995). Normative data on the Boston Naming
Test for elderly adults in a demographically diverse medical sample. The Clinical Neuropsychologist,
9(4), 321–325.
Sá, F., Pinto, P., Cunha, C., Lemos, R., Letra, L., Simões, M., & Santana, I. (2012). Differences between
early and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease in neuropsychological tests. Frontiers in Neurology, 3, 81.
Sadowsky, C. H., & Galvin, J. E. (2012). Guidelines for the management of cognitive and behavioral
problems in dementia. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 25(3), 350–366.
Schmidt, M. (1996). Rey auditory verbal learning test: A handbook (Vol. 17). Western Psychological
Services Los Angeles.
Schoenberg, M. R., Dawson, K. A., Duff, K., Patton, D., Scott, J. G., & Adams, R. L. (2006). Test
performance and classification statistics for the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in selected clinical
samples. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 21(7), 693–703.
189
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Seo, E. H., Lee, D. Y., Lee, J. H., Choo, I. H., Kim, J. W., Kim, S. G., Park, S. Y., Shin, J. H., Do, Y. J.,
& Yoon, J. C. (2010). Total scores of the CERAD neuropsychological assessment battery: Validation
for mild cognitive impairment and dementia patients with diverse etiologies. The American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 18(9), 801–809.
Simard, M. (1998). The Mini-Mental State Examination: Strengths and weaknesses of a clinical instrument.
The Canadian Alzheimer Disease Review, 12, 10–12.
Swainson, R., Hodges, J. R., Galton, C. J., Semple, J., Michael, A., Dunn, B. D., Iddon, J. L., Robbins,
T. W., & Sahakian, B. J. (2001). Early detection and differential diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and
depression with neuropsychological tasks. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 12(4), 265–280.
Tahami Monfared, A. A., Byrnes, M. J., White, L. A., & Zhang, Q. (2022). The Humanistic and Economic
Burden of Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurology and Therapy, 1–27.
Takeda, N., Terada, S., Sato, S., Honda, H., Yoshida, H., Kishimoto, Y., Kamata, G., Oshima, E., Ishihara,
T., & Kuroda, S. (2010). Wisconsin card sorting test and brain perfusion imaging in early dementia.
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 29(1), 21–27.
Tallberg, I.-M. (2005). The Boston naming test in Swedish: Normative data. Brain and Language, 94(1),
19–31.
Tierney, M. C., Nores, A., Snow, W. G., Fisher, R. H., Zorzitto, M. L., & Reid, D. W. (1994). Use of the
Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in differentiating normal aging from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
dementia. Psychological Assessment, 6(2), 129.
Ulbl, J., & Rakusa, M. (2021). The Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale–Cognitive Subscale (ADASCog):
Validation of Slovenian version for detecting mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s dementia.
Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 17, e056177.
van den Berg, E., Poos, J. M., Jiskoot, L. C., Heijnen, L. M., Franzen, S., Steketee, R. M. E., Meijboom,
R., De Jong, F. J., Seelaar, H., & Van Swieten, J. (2020). Differences in discriminability and response bias
on Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test Delayed Recognition in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 26(9), 918–926.
Verma, N., Beretvas, S. N., Pascual, B., Masdeu, J. C., & Markey, M. K. (2015). New scoring methodology
improves the sensitivity of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog)
in clinical trials. Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy, 7(1), 1–17.
Wei, M., Shi, J., Li, T., Ni, J., Zhang, X., Li, Y., Kang, S., Ma, F., Xie, H., & Qin, B. (2018). Diagnostic
accuracy of the Chinese version of the trail‐making test for screening cognitive impairment. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society, 66(1), 92–99.
Wilson, B. A., & Betteridge, S. (2019). Essentials of neuropsychological rehabilitation. Guilford Publications.
Winblad, B., Amouyel, P., Andrieu, S., Ballard, C., Brayne, C., Brodaty, H., Cedazo-Minguez, A., Dubois,
B., Edvardsson, D., & Feldman, H. (2016). Defeating Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias: A
priority for European science and society. Lancet Neurology, 15(5), 455–532.
190
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
World Health Organization. (2021). Dementia. WHO. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/dementia
Yaffe, K., Petersen, R. C., Lindquist, K., Kramer, J., & Miller, B. (2006). Subtype of mild cognitive
impairment and progression to dementia and death. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 22(4),
312–319.
Yap, P. L.-K., Ng, T.-P., Niti, M., Yeo, D., & Henderson, L. (2007). Diagnostic performance of Clock
Drawing Test by CLOX in an Asian Chinese population. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders,
24(3), 193–200.
Yassuda, M. S., Flaks, M. K., Viola, L. F., Pereira, F. S., Memória, C. M., Nunes, P. V., & Forlenza,
O. V. (2010). Psychometric characteristics of the Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test (RBMT) as an
early detection instrument for dementia and mild cognitive impairment in Brazil. International Psychogeriatrics,
22(6), 1003–1011.
Zalonis, I., Kararizou, E., Triantafyllou, N. I., Kapaki, E., Papageorgiou, S., Sgouropoulos, P., & Vassilopoulos,
D. (2008). A normative study of the trail making test A and B in Greek adults. The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 22(5), 842–850.
ADDITIONAL READING
Giraldo, D. L., Sijbers, J., Romero, E., & Initiative, A. D. N. (2021). Quantification of cognitive impairment
to characterize heterogeneity of patients at risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease dementia.
Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring, 13(1), e12237. doi:10.1002/
dad2.12237 PMID:34541290
Hahn-Barma, V., Chamayou, C., Rogan, C., Sarazin, M., & Dubois, B. (2022). Neuropsychological
methods in mild cognitive impairment. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience. PMID:22034137
Kiselica, A. M., Johnson, E., & Benge, J. F. (2021). How impaired is too impaired? Exploring futile neuropsychological
test patterns as a function of dementia severity and cognitive screening scores. Journal
of Neuropsychology, 15(3), 410–427. doi:10.1111/jnp.12243 PMID:33655681
Mordhorst, S., Coulehan, K., & Roseman, E. C. (2022). Neuropsychology Assessment in Dementia and
Neurodegenerative Disease. In Hybrid PET/MR Neuroimaging (pp. 247–255). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
3-030-82367-2_21
Mura, T., Coley, N., Amieva, H., Berr, C., Gabelle, A., Ousset, P., Vellas, B., & Andrieu, S. (2022).
Cognitive decline as an outcome and marker of progression toward dementia, in early preventive trials.
Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 18(4), 676–687. doi:10.1002/alz.12431 PMID:34482607
Nevado, A., Del Rio, D., Pacios, J., & Maestú, F. (2022). Neuropsychological networks in cognitively
healthy older adults and dementia patients. Neuropsychology, Development, and Cognition. Section
B, Aging, Neuropsychology and Cognition, 29(5), 903–927. doi:10.1080/13825585.2021.1965951
PMID:34415217
191
Cognitive Assessment Tools for Dementia in Healthcare
﻿
Requena-Komuro, M.-C., Jiang, J., Dobson, L., Benhamou, E., Russell, L., Bond, R. L., Brotherhood, E. V.,
Greaves, C., Barker, S., & Rohrer, J. D. (2022). Neuropsychological assessments for dementia research in the
COVID-19 era: comparing remote and face-to-face testing. MedRxiv. doi:10.1101/2022.04.28.22274370
Wetherell, J. L., & Jeste, D. V. (2022). Diagnostic decision tree in dementia. Dialogues in Clinical
Neuroscience. PMID:22033852
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cognitive Deficits: This refers to neuropsychological brain impairment revealed during screening
procedures in healthcare systems.
Cognitive Domains: This refers to the brain’s cognitive processes such as language, memory, attention
and executive functions etc.
Dementia: This is a term that refers to severe and progressive cognitive impairment that leads to
dependent living and serious issues with communicating one’s needs, due to brain cell damage.
Health Economics: This is the field of economics that focuses on identifying where the healthcare
resources and funding are allocated in healthcare systems.
Mild Cognitive Impairment: This is a decline in cognitive processes due to ageing or damage to
brain cells.
Neuropsychological Testing: This refers to screening and diagnostic assessment procedures and
include cognitive functions.
Normative Data: This is information about specific characteristics in a specific population.
Psychometrics: This concerns the creation of neuropsychological tool measurements based on
psychological constructs.
192
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 12
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch012
ABSTRACT
Patient satisfaction has gained relevance in clinical practice, and knowing the variables with the greatest predictive
power in this assessment is vital. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship between
postoperative satisfaction of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and acquired functioning and to
determine differences between sexes. This retrospective observational study included 183 patients undergoing TKA
between 2018–2021. Functioning variables were pain, range of motion, gait distance, and WOMAC domains. There
were significant differences in gait distance, pain, and WOMAC between the pre- and postoperative periods. Women
had worse scores in final evaluation moments, although satisfaction was similar between the sexes. Satisfaction and
the difference and the rate of change in WOMAC were significantly correlated. In the classification and regression
tree analysis, the variable that most differentiated satisfaction in women was the WOMAC variation; in men, it
was the pain variation rate.
Association Between the
Acquired Functioning and
Personal Satisfaction After
Total Knee Arthroplasty:
A Study Based on a Classification
and Regression Tree
Ana Paula Fontes
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4431-5229
University of Algarve, Portugal
Ana Marreiros
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9410-4772
University of Algarve, Portugal
Marina Gueorguieva Kovatchki
University of Algarve, Portugal
Nuno César Barbosa
Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
Daniel Bernardino
Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
Acácio Ramos
Vila Franca de Xira Hospital, Portugal
João Paulo Sousa
Algarve Private Hospital, Portugal
193
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
INTRODUCTION
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common musculoskeletal condition and is characterized by multiple impairments
of structures and functions, progressing to joint damage that, over time, becomes irreversible,
significantly impacting individuals’ performance of activities and quality of life. In the case of knee OA,
the most common manifestations comprise pain, stiffness, loss of mobility, and disability in activities
of daily living, for which the standard surgical treatment in the terminal phase is total knee arthroplasty
(TKA).About 33.6% of the population aged 65 and older suffer from OA (Lawrence et al., 2008), whose
risk to the knee is lifelong; when comparing men and women, 40 and 47%, respectively, are affected by
this comorbidity, whose effects are exacerbated by obesity (Neogi & Zhang, 2013). The pathophysiology
of OA is complex and includes mechanisms of cellular stress and degradation of the extracellular
matrix, with maladaptive responses from innate immunity and significant repercussions at the cartilage
level and in other joint structures, including subchondral bone, menisci, ligaments, synovial membrane,
and synovial fluid (Brandt et al., 2006). The higher prevalence of OA in females is related to hormonal
physiology and anatomical specificities. Genes that code for estrogen receptors increase the risk of OA,
and women have thinner articular cartilages, a Q angle that is about 3° higher than men, a narrower and
shorter distal femur, and a difference in the size of the tibial plates (Hitt et al., 2003).
Obesity is commonly associated with hip and knee OA due to the implicit overload it causes these
joints. However, other justifications for its association are related to biological mechanisms, such as cartilage
growth and bone factors, whose higher presence in obesity precipitates joint degradation (Felson,
1992). Another factor related to knee OA is traumatic injuries throughout the life cycle, specifically
those involving the menisci and anterior cruciate ligament. A meniscal lesion or partial meniscectomy
tends to potentiate the onset of OA due to the close kinematic relationship between the menisci and
articular cartilage (Madry et al., 2012). Nevertheless, Ajuied et al. (2014) reported that anterior cruciate
ligament injuries increase the risk of knee OA by 3.89 due to the instability they cause in this joint by
changing the load-bearing area to the periphery, thus overloading the articular cartilage in this region
(Heijink et al., 2012).
Total knee arthroplasty is one of the most performed musculoskeletal surgeries and is considered a
highly effective intervention. It provides overall good functional results and high satisfaction levels. In
the last decade, TKAs have increased exponentially due to the aging population, increased prevalence of
obesity, and leisure activities (Murphy & Helmick, 2012; United States Bone and Joint Initiative, 2014).
Despite providing high levels of satisfaction, various studies have reported that 20–30% of patients are
dissatisfied, with surgeons curiously expressing higher levels of satisfaction with the results obtained
compared to patients (Bourne et al., 2010; Canovas & Dagneaux, 2018; Dunbar et al., 2013; Gunaratne
et al., 2017; Khatib et al., 2020).
Although numerous factors influence patient satisfaction, one of the main reasons for dissatisfaction
is high patient expectations. When these patients do not achieve the expected results, they may be ten
times more likely to be dissatisfied with their treatment outcome (Canovas & Dagneaux, 2018). However,
these expectations relate to pain relief, improved physical capacity, and improved psychosocial
well-being. Other factors contributing to dissatisfaction include demographic factors such as age and sex
and functional factors such as residual pain, stiffness and inflammation, low postoperative functional
capacity, and postoperative complications (Bourne et al., 2010; Canovas & Dagneaux, 2018).
Addressing expectations in a preoperative consultation to ensure realistic expectations has been
reported to be beneficial. This action, along with users’ participation in postoperative rehabilitation
194
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
programs, is vital for surgical success and improving satisfaction rates (Bourne et al., 2010; Bryan et
al., 2018; Filbay et al., 2018; Genêt et al., 2008; Hamilton et al., 2013; Husain & Lee, 2015; Thambiah
et al., 2015). Given the above, the primary objective of this study was to know the relationship between
the functionality achieved at 90 days (D90) after surgery and personal satisfaction. The secondary objectives
were identifying the variables that differentiate satisfaction levels and determining sex differences.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
a) Study Design
This is an observational and retrospective study (level of evidence III) implemented using variables collected
in the Department of Orthopedics of the Hospital Particular do Algarve (Faro, Portugal) database
concerning patients undergoing TKA between 2018 and 2021; the sample consisted of 183 patients. The
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Hospital Particular do Algarve, and patients and
professionals allowed their data to be used through informed consent in force at the institution.
The functional variables were knee pain intensity, knee range of motion (passive flexion and extension),
gait distance, pain and stiffness symptomatology, and activity performance using the Western Ontario and
McMaster University Osteoarthritis (WOMAC) Index. The patients’ functionality was assessed between
7–15 days before surgery and 3 months after the intervention; personal satisfaction was collected at the
follow-up time. The preoperative assessment also included an educational session: teaching isometric
contractions of the major muscle groups of the lower limb, teaching active mobilization of the lower
limb joints, sitting/standing training, getting in/out of bed training, and gait training with crutches on the
ground and stairs. At the end of the session, the patient received a brochure explaining the entire course
of the intervention and the rehabilitation program (the one applied during hospitalization and the one
that the patient should continue at home). The surgical team always consisted of the same professionals
and was supervised by a senior surgeon; the rehabilitation team included two physical therapists.
b) Population and Sample
The population included 193 patients, and only the patients that completely fulfilled the variables under
study were included in the sample (by convenience) for all the different data collection moments. For
the inclusion criteria, we also considered patients whose reason for surgery was symptomatic arthrosis
resistant to conservative treatment. Thus, the sample was composed of 183 patients.
c) Measuring Instruments
Data collection included measurement instruments collected by the physical therapist (performancebased
measures of physical function) and patient-reported assessments (patient-reported measures), as
recommended in the literature. The first group of variables included measuring the range of motion of
knee flexion and extension by goniometric recording and the six-minute walk test (6MWT). The reported
assessment considered pain intensity through the visual analog scale (VAS), the WOMAC Index as a
multidimensional instrument to assess functioning, and personal satisfaction through a numerical scale
ranging from 0 to 10. The goniometric assessment was recorded by active mobilization according to the
195
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
protocol described by Norkin and White (2009) for the mobile and fixed positioning of the goniometer
and recording the range of motion. Adequate reliability was found in the literature, with a coefficient of
0.96 for flexion and 0.81 for extension in a cohort of patients with OA (Cibere et al., 2004).
In the context of TKA, active knee flexion has an intraclass coefficient of correlation of good reliability
for the immediate postoperative and post-acute settings (Lenssen et al., 2007; Jakobsen et al.,
2010). Regarding the extent and according to the same authors, the reliability of this active measuring
mode is moderate in acute settings and good in outpatient settings (Lenssen et al., 2007; Jakobsen et
al., 2010). Both studies concluded that the goniometric reliability of passive knee extension is poorer
than that of active knee extension, although both passive and active knee flexion show good reliability
(Jakobsen et al., 2010; Lenssen et al., 2007).
Similar findings were reported by Stratford et al. (2010) for active measurements after TKA; the
authors found that flexion had a good test-retest reliability (0.84) for a minimum detectable difference
of 9.6°, while these values were 0.6 and 6.3° for extension, respectively.
Although the 6MWT was initially adopted in the context of patients with cardiorespiratory dysfunctions,
it is now widespread in various disease conditions and contexts and even in healthy populations.
It is a timed test that measures the distance the individual can walk for six minutes on flat, even surfaces.
The individual, according to the protocol, has the possibility of using walking aids and receiving
incentives (standardized in time) so that the route covered is as long as possible (American Thoracic
Society, 2002). Various studies have included the 6MWT to analyze post-TKA performance due to the
test’s reliability over time. Nevertheless, some researchers have reported that the 6MWT only moderately
correlates with the multidimensional measures of self-reported functioning in TKA assessments
(Parent & Moffet, 2002), leading one to conclude that these instruments measure different aspects of
ability/performance. Therefore, both methods should be considered in TKA assessments and interventions
(Kennedy et al., 2006).
The VAS was used for its simplicity and for being widely adopted in the literature. The patient is
asked to rate the intensity of their pain by placing a mark on a horizontal or vertical 100-mm long line,
where one end of the line represents no pain, and the other represents the most intense pain imaginable.
Pain intensity is quantified by measuring the distance (using a ruler) in millimeters from the end of the
line, represented by “no pain,” to the mark placed by the patient (Hawker et al., 2011). Higher scores
on the VAS indicate greater pain intensity. The minimum clinically important change in pain intensity
measured using the VAS and in patients with knee OA is 19.9 mm (Tubach et al., 2005). In this study,
knee pain intensity at rest was collected, and the values were recorded in the database in centimeters.
The WOMAC is one of the most widely used instruments to assess functionality in hip and knee OA,
including situations where the prosthetic solution has already been established. The instrument was in
1982 and has undergone several versions. The WOMAC can be self-administered, although it has also
been validated for telephone interview and digital application; it is composed of three domains/dimensions
with a total of twenty-four items: pain (5 items), stiffness (2 items), and physical function/activities
(17 items) (Collins et al., 2011). Responses can be given using a five-option Likert scale or a 100-mm
visual analog scale (Collins et al., 2011).
In this study, the Likert scale was chosen, ranging from “no pain/stiffness intensity or no difficulty”
(value 0) to “very intense pain/stiffness/difficulty” (value 4), in which lower scores correspond to higher
functional levels. Thus, the domain scores range from 0 to 20 for pain, 0 to 8 for stiffness, and 0 to 68
for activities, generating a total score between 0–96.
196
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Notably, the questionnaire should be considered invalid if two or more pain items, both stiffness items,
or four or more activity items are missing (Collins et al., 2011). Despite the overall good psychometric
characteristics attributed to the WOMAC, some authors have raised concerns about the possibility that
its domains may produce floor or ceiling effects at certain points. For instance, Escobar et al. (2007) and
Impellizzeri et al. (2011) stated that ceiling effects have been reported in various studies for all domains
at 6 months and 2 years after TKA. Regarding the ability to detect changes in the individuals’ capacity/
performance — an aspect that in recent years has gained prominence in interpreting the results from
Minimal Detectable Change or Minimum Clinically Important Difference (MCID) — the values vary
according to the time of progression. According to Collins et al. (2011), the MCID (0–100 scale) for six
months after surgery could be considered: 22.87 for pain, 14.43 for stiffness, and 19.01 for activities. At
the end of one year, these values should be 36 for pain and 33 for activities, respectively.
Although the scientific community recognizes the many advantages of using the WOMAC, it also
acknowledges some of its shortcomings, specifically in the domain of activities: i) some tasks cannot
be regularly performed (assessed) in all individuals or all contexts (e.g., climbing/descending stairs or
bathing), ii) the content validity does not seem to be guaranteed for more physically active individuals,
as it does not include sufficiently difficult or complex functional tasks, and iii) a Rasch analysis concluded
that there are redundant tasks (Collins et al., 2011). Nevertheless, numerous rheumatologists have
questioned the reliability of the stiffness domain, despite the consistent internal consistency reported
in the literature.
The most used patient-reported outcome measures (PROMS) to assess satisfaction include the 36-
item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36), the 12-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-12), the WOMAC
index, the Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), and the Oxford knee score (OKS)
(Choi & Ra, 2016). In this study, the WOMAC was chosen as an instrument capable of measuring the
effectiveness of surgery and non-surgical interventions, as it is statistically considered to be one of the
predictors of satisfaction. Satisfaction as a dependent variable was collected using a numeric rating scale
of 0–10, where “0” corresponded to “totally dissatisfied” and “10” to “totally satisfied,” with higher
scores representing higher satisfaction. The numeric rating scale is commonly used for self-reporting
subjective patient conditions (satisfaction, pain, need for analgesia, breathing difficulty) because of its
many advantages: ease of administration and scoring, multiple response options, and lack of age-related
difficulties.
d) Variables
The following variables were considered:
i) Sociodemographic: age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and “with whom you live” (alone or with
others).
ii) Perioperative: laterality of the operated knee and length of hospitalization.
iii) Functional: knee joint flexion and extension; 6MWT; pain; WOMAC index, through the partial
score of each dimension (pain, stiffness, and activities) and its total score.
iv) Functional evolution: 6MWT rate of change, pain degree rate, and WOMAC score rate of change.
v) Personal satisfaction.
197
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
e) Statistical Analysis
The database was anonymized before the descriptive and inferential statistical analysis using the SPSS®
28 software (IBM Inc., Armonk, NY). As for the descriptive statistics, we considered the mean, standard
deviation, median and interquartile range, and absolute and relative frequencies for each dependent
variable. For the statistical inference processes and after being tested for normality of all variables, the
following tests were applied: Chi-square, Student-t for independent samples, and one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on the variables that revealed normal distribution. The Mann-Whitney test and Paired
Samples were applied for paired data (pre- and postoperative) in the variables where normality was not
verified. In bivariate terms, Spearman’s test was calculated to analyze the coefficient of correlation between
the differences in the mean values and rates of change of the functionality variables and satisfaction.
The multivariate statistics included a clustering analysis to understand if the levels of significant
association (between the functionality variables and satisfaction) were associated with a specific patient
profile by applying the Classification and Regression Tree (CRT) method. The results were considered
statistically significant whenever p < 0.05 except for the coefficient of correlation, where p < 0.01 was
also considered (these exceptions are duly identified).
RESULTS
Most of the patients were women, totaling 115 (62.8%). The mean age was similar between sexes (p =
0.627): 70.3 ± 7.4 years in women and 70.9 ± 8.1 years in men. A higher prevalence of BMI was observed
in the subgroup of BMI >30 kg/m2, with a total of 82 (46.6%) patients, with no difference between sexes
(p = 0.055). Out of the total number of patients, roughly 85% had a partner; of the men, only 5% lived
alone, and for women, this percentage was significantly higher (p = 0.006), with a value above 20%.
The mean length of stay was 2.8 ± 1.2 days, with no differences between women and men (p = 0.168).
Table 1 lists all the results of the sample characterization, differentiated between women and men.
The evolution of pre- and postoperative functionality is shown in Table 2. Overall, significant improvements
were observed in all variables except for the range of motion for the total sample and comparative
analysis between sexes.
Women and men were comparatively analyzed for baseline and acquired functionality at D90 (Table
2). The initial assessment revealed that the range of motion and pain were similar between the sexes,
while the remaining variables were significantly more positive for the men. In the final evaluation, the
mean values achieved were identical between women and men except for 6MWT, which revealed higher
values in men. All results are presented in Table 3.
In order to better understand the functional evolution between women and men, the differences in the
mean values achieved in each of the variables and the respective rates of change were compared. The
results revealed that, overall, women improved more than men, achieving significant mean differences
in pain (7.4 ± 3.6 vs 6.2 ± 4.1; p = 0.035), activities (22 ± 13.4 vs 16.9 ± 11.2; p = 0.009), and total
WOMAC score (30.9 ± 17.5 vs 24.2 ± 15.1; p = 0.009). Regarding the variation rates, no significant
differences were found between the sexes, although the women tended to show more positive values in
the functional evolution except for pain. As for personal satisfaction, the results were identical for both
sexes. This analysis is listed in Table 4.
198
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
The frequency distribution of satisfaction values for women and men is shown in Table 5. The lowest
satisfaction value in women was “4” with an absolute frequency of 1, while in men, this value was
“5” with an absolute frequency of 2. The value for both sexes was “10,” with an absolute frequency of
49 in women (42.6%) and 24 in men (35.3%). The satisfaction value “8” was the second most assigned
score for both sexes.
Table 2. Pre- and postoperative functionality evolution
Total
n = 183
Women
n = 115 (62.8%)
Men
n = 68 (37.2%)
Functionality
evolution Pre-op Post-op p-value Pre-op Post-op p-value Pre-op Post-op p-value
Flexion 108 ± 21 107 ± 13 0.5431 107 ± 21 107 ± 12 1.0001 111 ± 20 108 ± 14 0.3211
Extension 3 ± 5 3 ± 4 0.2071 3 ± 5 2 ± 4 0.2011 3 ± 5 3 ± 5 0.7751
6MWT 266 ± 100 295 ± 90 <0.0011 247 ± 88 278 ± 75 0.0011 300 ± 110 323 ± 105 0.0191
VAS 5.3 ± 2.2 1.4 ± 2 <0.0011 5.4 ± 2.3 1.4 ± 2 <0.0011 4.9 ± 2.2 1.3 ± 1.9 <0.0011
WOMAC - Pain 9.9 ± 3.2 3 ± 2.7 <0.0011 10.4 ± 3.2 3.0 ± 2.8 <0.0011 9.1 ± 3.0 2.9 ± 2.5 <0.0011
WOMAC -
Stiffness 2.8 ± 1.9 1.6 ± 1.3 <0.0011 3 ± 1.9 1.6 ± 1.3 <0.0011 2.5 ± 1.8 1.5 ± 1.3 <0.0031
WOMAC -
Activities 32.4 ± 11.7 12.2 ± 9.4 <0.0011 34.4 ± 11.7 12.4 ± 8.7 <0.0011 28.9 ± 10.8 11.9 ± 10.5 <0.0011
WOMAC - Total 45.1 ± 15.2 16.7 ± 11.9 <0.0011 47.8 ± 15.4 17 ± 11.6 <0.0011 40.4 ± 13.9 16.2 ± 12.6 <0.0011
1Nonparametric tests: related samples
Table 1. Sample characterization
Total
n = 183
Women
n = 115 (62.8%)
Men
n = 68 (37.2%) p-value
Age 70.5 ± 7.6 70.3 ± 7.4 70.9 ± 8.1 0.6271
BMI
<25 23.3 ± 1.0; 32 (18.2%) 23.2 ± 1.2; 20 (17.9%) 23.6 ± 0.8; 12 (18.8%)
25–30 29.6 ± 4.7; 62 (35.2%) 30.1 ± 5.0; 36 (32.1%) 28.7 ± 3.9; 26 (40.6%) 0.0552
>30 33.7 ± 3.1; 82 (46.6%) 34.2 ± 3.4; 56 (50.0%) 32.7 ± 2.1; 26 (40.6%)
With whom you live
Alone 26 (14.9%) 23 (20.4%) 3 (4.8%)
0.0063
With others 149 (85.1%) 90 (79.6%) 59 (95.2%)
Laterality
Left 91 (49.7%) 56 (48.7%) 35 (51.5%)
0.7173
Right 92 (50.3%) 59 (51.3%) 33 (48.5%)
Days of hospitalization 2.8 ± 1.2 2.8 ± 1.3 2.61 ± 1.2 0.1684
1Student-T |2One-Way ANOVA |3 Chi-square |4Mann-Whitney
199
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
The correlation between satisfaction and differences in the mean values in functionality was analyzed
using Spearman’s test, in addition to the correlation between satisfaction and the respective rates of change
for women and men. A correlation was observed in all variables of functionality and satisfaction in the
men; the association was always positive, with its weakest rate of change in the 6MWT (rs = 0.275) and
the highest value in the WOMAC stiffness rate of change (rs = 0.524). As for the women, no correlation
was observed between satisfaction and the following variables: mean value difference and rate of change
in the 6MWT, mean value difference in the VAS, and mean value difference in the WOMAC stiffness.
The remaining functional variables correlated with satisfaction, and their association was also always
positive, with values between rs = 0.218 for the difference in the mean value of the WOMAC pain and
rs = 0.405 for the rate of change in the WOMAC total score. All correlation values between satisfaction
and functionality are presented in Table 6.
Table 3. Comparison of functional evaluations (pre- and postoperative) between women and men
functional evaluations Women/men
p-value
Flexion
Preoperative 0.2121
Postoperative 0.7421
Extension
Preoperative 0.8311
Postoperative 0.5901
6MWT
Preoperative <0.0011
Postoperative 0.0031
VAS
Preoperative 0.1191
Postoperative 0.9221
WOMAC - Pain
Preoperative 0.0081
Postoperative 0.9811
WOMAC - Stiffness
Preoperative 0.0401
Postoperative 0.7161
WOMAC - Activities
Preoperative 0.0021
Postoperative 0.3311
WOMAC - Total
Preoperative 0.0021
Postoperative 0.4561
1Mann-Whitney
200
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
In order to analyze how the independent variables interacted with the dependent variable (personal
satisfaction), a multivariate analysis was employed by using the CRT method, which, through a decision
tree, ranks the discriminative power of the selected dependent variable to understand the interaction
between the independent or explanatory variables. In women, the first level of differentiation was the rate
of change in the WOMAC activity score, which was split between ≤58.9 and >58.9%. In the ≤58.9%
split, the satisfaction value that was repeated most often was “8” (35%). Above 58.9%, the satisfaction
value most often observed was “10” (62.5%). The next level of differentiation was the rate of change of
the WOMAC pain score, divided between ≤96.2 and >96.2%; the most prevalent satisfaction value in
these two divisions was “10.”
In men, the first level of differentiation was the rate of change of the WOMAC pain score, which
was split between ≤80.9 and >80.9%. In the division ≤80.9%, the satisfaction value that was repeated
more often corresponded to “8” (40.6%), while in the division >80.9%, this value was “10” (78.3%).
As a second level of differentiation, the rate of change of the WOMAC stiffness score appeared and
was divided between ≤29.2 and >29.2%, in which the most observed values were “7” (30%) and “8”
(58.3%), respectively.
Table 4. Comparison of the differences in mean values and rates of change of the variables of functionality
and satisfaction achieved in the D90 between women and men
variables of functionality and satisfaction Total
(n = 183)
Women
n = 115 (62.8%)
Men
n = 68
(37,2%)
p-value
6MWT difference 30.0 ± 75.9 31.5 ± 70.6 27.4 ± 84.6 0.7271
6MWT rate of change (%) 9.0 ± 27.6 10.1 ± 27.8 7.0 ± 27.4 0.5682
VAS difference 3.9 ± 2.9 4.1 ± 3.0 3.7 ± 3.0 0.4372
VAS rate of change (%) 70.3 ± 55.8 69.0 ± 49.8 72.5 ± 65.1 0.5842
WOMAC difference - pain 7.0 ± 3.8 7.4 ± 3.6 6.2 ± 4.1 0.0351
WOMAC rate of change - pain (%) 67.4 ± 36.4 70.8 ± 28.1 61.6 ± 46.8 0.3092
WOMAC difference - stiffness 1.2 ± 2.0 1.4 ± 2.0 0.9 ± 2.0 0.1702
WOMAC rate of change - stiffness (%) 46.2 ± 51.2 49.7 ± 44.5 39.9 ± 61.4 0.6032
WOMAC difference - activities 20.1 ± 12.8 22.0 ± 13.4 16.9 ± 11.2 0.0091
WOMAC rate of change - activities (%) 59.5 ± 33.8 60.5 ± 33.6 57.9 ± 33.5 0.5362
WOMAC difference - total 28.4 ± 16.9 30.9 ± 17.5 24.2 ± 15.1 0.0091
WOMAC rate of change - total (%) 60.7 ± 29.5 62.3 ± 28.6 58.1 ± 31.2 0.3842
Satisfaction 8.8 ± 1.4 8.8 ± 1.4 8.6 ± 1.5 0.3642
1T-Student |2Mann-Whitney
201
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Table 5. Frequency distribution of the satisfaction variable for women and men
Frequency Percentage Valid percentage Cumulative
percentage
Women Valid 4 1 0.9 1.0 1.0
5 2 1.7 1.9 2.9
6 4 3.5 3.8 6.7
7 9 7.8 8.7 15.4
8 24 20.9 23.1 38.5
9 15 13.0 14.4 52.9
10 49 42.6 47.1 100.0
Total 104 90.4 100.0
Missing 999 11 9.6
Total 115 100.0
Men Valid 5 2 2.9 3.6 3.6
6 2 2.9 3.6 7.3
7 8 11.8 14.5 21.8
8 15 22.1 27.3 49.1
9 4 5.9 7.3 56.4
10 24 35.3 43.6 100.0
Total 55 80.9 100.0
Missing 999 13 19.1
Total 13 68 100.0
Total Valid 4 1 0.5 0.6 0.6
5 4 2.2 2.5 3.1
6 6 3.3 3.8 6.9
7 17 9.3 10.7 17.6
8 39 21.3 24.5 42.1
9 19 10.4 11.9 54.1
10 73 39.9 45.9 100.0
Total 159 86.9 100.0
Missing 999 24 13.1
Total 183 100.0
202
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
DISCUSSION
a) Functioning Acquired on D90
Significant improvements in functionality were observed, as described in most studies, except for flexion
and extension range of motion. Regarding flexion, we found that the average baseline value was higher
than in most studies (>107° for women and 111° for men), leading us to speculate that this variable
would not have a priori an important margin to evolve in this period. Indeed, at 3 months post operation,
we can assume that the results were almost unchanged from the values before the surgery and close to
1–2-year follow-ups, as reported by Anwar et al. (2016) and Reimann et al. (2019). For Parsley et al.
(1992), when the preoperative flexion is >105°, the expected evolution in the first months will be less
compared to patients with this more diminished function. According to Berend (2010), patients with
higher preoperative mobility (116–122°) tend to lose a few degrees after TKA. In the case of the present
study and according to the same author, the predicted increase in flexion would be +3° (predicted
increase for baseline values between 103 and 115°).
Table 6. Correlation between personal satisfaction and functionality for women and men
Total
(n = 183)
Women
n = 115 (62.8%)
Men
n = 68 (37,2%)
Coefficient
correlation p-value Coefficient
correlation p-value Coefficient
correlation p-value
6MWT difference
and satisfaction 0.193 0.015* 0.151 0.1318 0.280 0.038*
6MWT rate of change
and satisfaction 0.185 0.021* 0.144 0.1498 0.275 0.042*
VAS difference
and satisfaction 0.167 0.035* 0.093 0.3458 0.292 0.030*
VAS rate of change
and satisfaction 0.383 <0.001** 0.342 <0.001** 0.484 <0.001**
WOMAC difference - pain
and satisfaction 0.277 <0.001** 0.218 0.026* 0.374 0.005**
WOMAC rate of change - pain
and satisfaction 0.445 <0.001** 0.396 <0.001** 0.514 <0.001**
WOMAC difference - stiffness
and satisfaction 0.211 <0.001** 0.084 0.3978 0.419 0.001**
WOMAC rate of change - stiffness
and satisfaction 0.349 <0.001** 0.256 0.017* 0.524 <0.0018**
WOMAC difference - activities
and satisfaction 0.355 <0.001** 0.344 <0.001** 0.356 0.0088**
WOMAC rate of change - activities
and satisfaction 0.401 <0.001** 0.398 <0.001** 0.421 0.001**
WOMAC difference - total
and satisfaction 0.358 <0.001* 0.318 0.001** 0.403 0.002**
WOMAC rate of change - total
and satisfaction 0.431 <0.001** 0.405 <0.001** 0.487 <0.001**
* Significant correlation at the level of *0.05 | **0.01
203
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
It is also important to mention that the values observed in flexion can likely be considered stabilized;
however, one must bear in mind that some authors believe that the time window necessary for flexion to
evolve most significantly is the first 3 months after surgery (Mehta et al., 2020; Mutsuzaki et al., 2017).
Small gains may still be seen for up to 6 months, which will tend to consolidate after 1 year (Mehta et
al., 2020; Mutsuzaki et al., 2017). If this assumption is true, perhaps future difficulties will be observed
in performing tasks such as putting on socks/shoes, squatting to pick up an object from the floor, or
getting in/out of a car. The extension also showed identical values between the pre- and postoperative
periods, which may be related to the difficulty in gaining strength by the extensor apparatus after a TKA.
Indeed, the meta-analysis by Moon et al. (2016) draws interesting conclusions on this subject that are
worth noting; the temporal behavior of the force excursion of the quadriceps and ischiotibial muscles over
time is identical, with maximum decreases observed at 3 months and recovery to preoperative levels at
6 months. Nevertheless, the decreased quadriceps strength is 2–3 times more severe than the ischiotibial
muscles. These physiological findings may influence the decrease in active capacity in knee extension.
b) Absolute Gains in Acquired Functioning on D90
When Comparing Women and Men
When the absolute gains acquired o D90 were evaluated between women and men, through the difference
of the mean value and rate of change, we observed that they were higher in women for the WOMAC
variables (pain, activities, and total score). Sex as a predictor of functional outcomes is controversial in
the literature. The guideline by Jette et al. (2020) states that there is no consensus on this factor, as both
sexes may be related to better or worse performance after TKA depending on the outcome measures
used. However, the authors mentioned two high-quality studies comparing men and women. The first
study refers to Naylor et al. (2012), in which women scored worse on the OKS and men showed worse
values in knee extension, while the second study, by Sullivan et al. (2009), revealed that women reported
higher levels of pain at 6-weeks of follow-up. In the present study, our findings contradict these data,
perhaps due to the women beginning the baseline assessment with worse functionality levels in these
variables and were, therefore, able to gain more from the surgical intervention.
c) Satisfaction
The average level of satisfaction was good for both sexes, as 84.6% of women and 78.2% of men scored
satisfaction with ≥8 values. Although many studies have reported higher levels of dissatisfaction for
women, our results contradict this conclusion; even without significant differences, women were more
satisfied than men. This value may be justified by the differences and rates of change that were globally
higher in women, indicating more evident improvements in the female sex.
While searching for studies to support this study, only one article was found that relates the pre- and
postoperative WOMAC scale to personal satisfaction. Walker et al. (2018) found that patients with a
higher score between the preoperative and one-year postoperative scores on the WOMAC index demonstrated
higher satisfaction than those with a lower score. Thambiah et al. (2015) also corroborate this
conclusion, as the author observed that patients with a lower WOMAC score at the end of one year after
surgery are more satisfied than those with a higher score.
The present study supports these results because the differences in all domains and the total of the
WOMAC scale were statistically significantly correlated with satisfaction except for the difference in
204
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
the stiffness domain for the women. Postoperative stiffness, caused by a muscle imbalance between the
extensor and flexor muscles, is quite common and one of the indications for participation in a rehabilitation
program.
d) Classification and Regression Tree
Several authors have described the WOMAC domains and total score as important predictors of satisfaction
(Giesinger et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2021; Walker et al., 2018). Pain was the common and important
discrimination variable for satisfaction for both sexes, although with different manifestations, thereby
corroborating various studies (Bryan et al., 2018; Dunbar et al., 2013; Husain & Lee, 2015; Lau et al.,
2012). Pain is the most common symptom and the most influential decision-maker for patients to accept
undergoing TKA, being one of the most important and valued outcomes. Most authors have described pain
reduction or disappearance as the most prevalent expectation of knee OA patients and, when achieved,
with positive repercussions on activity performance and satisfaction.
In women, activity performance was the variable with the highest explanatory power for high satisfaction
levels. Indeed, as reported in numerous studies, improved activity performance comes after
decreased pain as the most important variable for satisfaction (Dunbar et al., 2013; Halawi et al., 2019;
Lau et al., 2012; Walker et al., 2018). In men, stiffness emerged as the variable that best explains the
high satisfaction levels, and the perception of stiffness is associated with activity performance, namely
walking speed. In our study, men showed a significant improvement in these variables, which may explain
why stiffness is important for satisfaction.
LIMITATIONS
The authors admit there may be some limitations in this study: i) we did not know if the patients had
integrated rehabilitation programs or in which modalities they had done so; ii) we did not consider comorbidities
as an essential variable for the functionality achieved and satisfaction; iii) since this was a
comparative study between sexes, the sample size could have been more balanced; iv) expectations were
not assessed preoperatively, nor were we asked whether expectations were met after surgery; finally, v)
we assessed satisfaction after 3 months; perception regarding pain and performance in activities may continue
to improve and promote satisfaction; therefore, a longer follow-up would have been a good strategy.
CONCLUSION
Patient satisfaction is an important outcome measure after total knee arthroplasty, and the WOMAC
index plays an important role in predicting satisfaction. Women and men have high satisfaction levels
after TKA, although the determinants contributing to this variable have different manifestations. For
women, what most contributes to satisfaction is the improvement in the performance of activities and
decreased pain, while for men, it is the improvement in pain and stiffness symptoms.
205
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Funding
No external funding was received in this study.
Conflicts of Interest
Each author certifies that there are no commercial associations (e.g., consultancies, stock ownership,
equity interest, patent/licensing arrangements, etc.) that might conflict with the submitted article.
Ethical Approval
The institution approved the human protocol for this investigation. All investigations were conducted
per ethical research principles, and informed consent was obtained.
REFERENCES
Ajuied, A., Wong, F., Smith, C., Norris, M., Earnshaw, P., Back, D., & Davies, A. (2014). Anterior
cruciate ligament injury and radiologic progression of knee osteoarthritis: A systematic review and metaanalysis.
The American Journal of Sports Medicine, 42(9), 2242–2252. doi:10.1177/0363546513508376
PMID:24214929
American Thoracic Society Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical Pulmonary Function Laboratories.
(2002). ATS statement: Guidelines for the six-minute walk test. American Journal of Respiratory
and Critical Care Medicine, 166(1), 111–117. doi:10.1164/ajrccm.166.1.at1102 PMID:12091180
Anwar, R., Kini, S. G., Sait, S., & Bruce, W. J. (2016). Early clinical and radiological results of total
knee arthroplasty using patient-specific guides in obese patients. Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma
Surgery, 136(2), 265–270. doi:10.100700402-015-2399-z PMID:26742495
Berend, M. (2010). Revision of the Stiff Total Knee Arthroplasty: An Operation to Try to Avoid. Seminars
in Arthroplasty, 21(2), 108–109. doi:10.1053/j.sart.2009.12.001
Bourne, R. B., Chesworth, B. M., Davis, A. M., Mahomed, N. N., & Charron, K. D. (2010). Patient
satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty: Who is satisfied and who is not? Clinical Orthopaedics and
Related Research, 468(1), 57–63. doi:10.100711999-009-1119-9 PMID:19844772
Brandt, K. D., Radin, E. L., Dieppe, P. A., & van de Putte, L. (2006). Yet more evidence that osteoarthritis
is not a cartilage disease. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 65(10), 1261–1264. doi:10.1136/
ard.2006.058347 PMID:16973787
Bryan, S., Goldsmith, L. J., Davis, J. C., Hejazi, S., MacDonald, V., McAllister, P., Randall, E.,
Suryaprakash, N., Wu, A. D., & Sawatzky, R. (2018). Revisiting patient satisfaction following total
knee arthroplasty: A longitudinal observational study. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 19(1), 423.
doi:10.118612891-018-2340-z PMID:30497445
206
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Canovas, F., & Dagneaux, L. (2018). Quality of life after total knee arthroplasty. Orthopaedics & traumatology,
surgery & research. OTSR, 104(1, 1S), S41–S46. doi:10.1016/j.otsr.2017.04.017 PMID:29183821
Choi, Y. J., & Ra, H. J. (2016). Patient Satisfaction after Total Knee Arthroplasty. Knee Surgery & Related
Research, 28(1), 1–15. doi:10.5792/ksrr.2016.28.1.1 PMID:26955608
Cibere, J., Bellamy, N., Thorne, A., Esdaile, J. M., McGorm, K. J., Chalmers, A., Huang, S., Peloso,
P., Shojania, K., Singer, J., Wong, H., & Kopec, J. (2004). Reliability of the knee examination in osteoarthritis:
Effect of standardization. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 50(2), 458–468. doi:10.1002/art.20025
PMID:14872488
Collins, N. J., Misra, D., Felson, D. T., Crossley, K. M., & Roos, E. M. (2011). Measures of knee function:
International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) Subjective Knee Evaluation Form, Knee Injury
and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score Physical
Function Short Form (KOOS-PS), Knee Outcome Survey Activities of Daily Living Scale (KOS-ADL),
Lysholm Knee Scoring Scale, Oxford Knee Score (OKS), Western Ontario and McMaster Universities
Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC), Activity Rating Scale (ARS), and Tegner Activity Score (TAS).
Arthritis care & research, 63(11), S208–S228. doi:10.1002/acr.20632
Dunbar, M. J., Richardson, G., & Robertsson, O. (2013). I can’t get no satisfaction after my total
knee replacement: Rhymes and reasons. The Bone & Joint Journal, 95-B(11, Suppl A), 148–152.
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.95B11.32767 PMID:24187375
Escobar, A., Quintana, J. M., Bilbao, A., Aróstegui, I., Lafuente, I., & Vidaurreta, I. (2007). Responsiveness
and clinically important differences for the WOMAC and SF-36 after total knee replacement.
Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 15(3), 273–280. doi:10.1016/j.joca.2006.09.001 PMID:17052924
Felson, D. T. (1992). Obesity and osteoarthritis of the knee. Bulletin on the Rheumatic Diseases, 41(2),
6–7. PMID:1600446
Filbay, S. R., Judge, A., Delmestri, A., Arden, N. K., Altman, D., Beard, D., Carr, A., Cooper, C., Culliford,
D., Griffin, T., Javaid, K., Latham, J., Murray, D., Pinedo-Villanueva, R., Price, A., & Prieto-Alhambra,
D.COASt Study Group. (2018). Evaluating Patients’ Expectations from a Novel Patient-Centered
Perspective Predicts Knee Arthroplasty Outcome. The Journal of Arthroplasty, 33(7), 2146–2152.e4.
doi:10.1016/j.arth.2018.02.026 PMID:29544972
Genêt, F., Schnitzler, A., Lapeyre, E., Roche, N., Autret, K., Fermanian, C., & Poiraudeau, S. (2008).
Change of impairment, disability and patient satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty in secondary care
practice. Annales de readaptation et de medecine physique: revue scientifique de la Societe francaise
de reeducation fonctionnelle de readaptation et de medecine physique, 51(8), 671–682. doi:10.1016/j.
annrmp.2008.08.002
Giesinger, J. M., Hamilton, D. F., Jost, B., Behrend, H., & Giesinger, K. (2015). WOMAC, EQ-5D and
Knee Society Score Thresholds for Treatment Success After Total Knee Arthroplasty. The Journal of
Arthroplasty, 30(12), 2154–2158. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2015.06.012 PMID:26160647
207
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Gunaratne, R., Pratt, D. N., Banda, J., Fick, D. P., Khan, R. J. K., & Robertson, B. W. (2017). Patient
Dissatisfaction Following Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Systematic Review of the Literature. The Journal
of Arthroplasty, 32(12), 3854–3860. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2017.07.021 PMID:28844632
Halawi, M. J., Jongbloed, W., Baron, S., Savoy, L., Williams, V. J., & Cote, M. P. (2019). Patient Dissatisfaction
After Primary Total Joint Arthroplasty: The Patient Perspective. The Journal of Arthroplasty,
34(6), 1093–1096. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2019.01.075 PMID:30799270
Hamilton, D. F., Lane, J. V., Gaston, P., Patton, J. T., Macdonald, D., Simpson, A. H., & Howie, C.
R. (2013). What determines patient satisfaction with surgery? A prospective cohort study of 4709 patients
following total joint replacement. BMJ Open, 3(4), e002525. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002525
PMID:23575998
Hawker, G. A., Mian, S., Kendzerska, T., & French, M. (2011). Measures of adult pain: Visual Analog
Scale for Pain (VAS Pain), Numeric Rating Scale for Pain (NRS Pain), McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ),
Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ), Chronic Pain Grade Scale (CPGS), Short Form-36
Bodily Pain Scale (SF-36 BPS), and Measure of Intermittent and Constant Osteoarthritis Pain (ICOAP).
Arthritis Care and Research, 63(S11, Suppl 11), S240–S252. doi:10.1002/acr.20543 PMID:22588748
Heijink, A., Gomoll, A. H., Madry, H., Drobnič, M., Filardo, G., Espregueira-Mendes, J., & Van Dijk,
C. N. (2012). Biomechanical considerations in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis of the knee. Knee surgery,
sports traumatology, arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 20(3), 423–435. doi:10.1007/
s00167-011-1818-0
Hitt, K., Shurman, J. R. II, Greene, K., McCarthy, J., Moskal, J., Hoeman, T., & Mont, M. A. (2003).
Anthropometric measurements of the human knee: Correlation to the sizing of current knee arthroplasty
systems. The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery. American Volume, 85-A(Suppl 4), 115–122.
doi:10.2106/00004623-200300004-00015 PMID:14652402
Husain, A., & Lee, G. C. (2015). Establishing Realistic Patient Expectations Following Total Knee Arthroplasty.
The Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 23(12), 707–713. doi:10.5435/
JAAOS-D-14-00049 PMID:26493969
Impellizzeri, F. M., Mannion, A. F., Leunig, M., Bizzini, M., & Naal, F. D. (2011). Comparison of the
reliability, responsiveness, and construct validity of 4 different questionnaires for evaluating outcomes
after total knee arthroplasty. The Journal of Arthroplasty, 26(6), 861–869. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2010.07.027
PMID:21074964
Jakobsen, T. L., Christensen, M., Christensen, S. S., Olsen, M., & Bandholm, T. (2010). Reliability of
knee joint range of motion and circumference measurements after total knee arthroplasty: does tester
experience matter? Physiotherapy research international: the journal for researchers and clinicians in
physical therapy, 15(3), 126–134. doi:10.1002/pri.450
Jette, D. U., Hunter, S. J., Burkett, L., Langham, B., Logerstedt, D. S., Piuzzi, N. S., Poirier, N. M.,
Radach, L. J. L., Ritter, J. E., Scalzitti, D. A., Stevens-Lapsley, J. E., Tompkins, J., & Zeni, J. Jr. (2020).
Physical Therapist Management of Total Knee Arthroplasty. Physical Therapy, 100(9), 1603–1631.
doi:10.1093/ptj/pzaa099 PMID:32542403
208
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Kennedy, D. M., Stratford, P. W., Hanna, S. E., Wessel, J., & Gollish, J. D. (2006). Modeling early recovery
of physical function following hip and knee arthroplasty. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 7(1),
100. doi:10.1186/1471-2474-7-100 PMID:17156487
Khatib, Y., Badge, H., Xuan, W., Naylor, J. M., & Harris, I. A. (2020). Patient satisfaction and perception
of success after total knee arthroplasty are more strongly associated with patient factors and complications
than surgical or anaesthetic factors. Knee surgery, sports traumatology, arthroscopy: official journal of
the ESSKA, 28(10), 3156–3163. doi:10.1007/s00167-019-05804-9
Lau, R. L., Gandhi, R., Mahomed, S., & Mahomed, N. (2012). Patient satisfaction after total knee
and hip arthroplasty. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 28(3), 349–365. doi:10.1016/j.cger.2012.05.001
PMID:22840303
Lawrence, R. C., Felson, D. T., Helmick, C. G., Arnold, L. M., Choi, H., Deyo, R. A., Gabriel, S., Hirsch,
R., Hochberg, M. C., Hunder, G. G., Jordan, J. M., Katz, J. N., Kremers, H. M., & Wolfe, F.National Arthritis
Data Workgroup. (2008). Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic conditions in
the United States. Part II. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 58(1), 26–35. doi:10.1002/art.23176 PMID:18163497
Lenssen, T. A., van Steyn, M. J., Crijns, Y. H., Waltjé, E. M., Roox, G. M., Geesink, R. J., van den Brandt,
P. A., & De Bie, R. A. (2008). Effectiveness of prolonged use of continuous passive motion (CPM), as
an adjunct to physiotherapy, after total knee arthroplasty. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 9(1), 60.
doi:10.1186/1471-2474-9-60 PMID:18442423
Liu, J., Yang, Y., Wan, S., Yao, Z., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Shi, P., & Zhang, C. (2021). A new prediction
model for patient satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty and the roles of different scoring systems: A
retrospective cohort study. Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery and Research, 16(1), 329. doi:10.118613018-
021-02469-4 PMID:34016153
Madry, H., Luyten, F. P., & Facchini, A. (2012). Biological aspects of early osteoarthritis. Knee surgery,
sports traumatology, arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 20(3), 407–422. doi:10.1007/s00167-
011-1705-8
Mehta, S., Rigney, A., Webb, K., Wesney, J., Stratford, P. W., Shuler, F. D., & Oliashirazi, A. (2020).
Characterizing the recovery trajectories of knee range of motion for one year after total knee replacement.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 36(1), 176–185. doi:10.1080/09593985.2018.1482980
PMID:29897271
Moon, Y. W., Kim, H. J., Ahn, H. S., & Lee, D. H. (2016). Serial Changes of Quadriceps and Hamstring
Muscle Strength Following Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Meta-Analysis. PLoS One, 11(2), e0148193.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148193 PMID:26849808
Murphy, L., & Helmick, C. G. (2012). The impact of osteoarthritis in the United States: A populationhealth
perspective. The American Journal of Nursing, 112(3, Suppl 1), S13–S19. doi:10.1097/01.
NAJ.0000412646.80054.21 PMID:22373741
Mutsuzaki, H., Takeuchi, R., Mataki, Y., & Wadano, Y. (2017). Target range of motion for rehabilitation
after total knee arthroplasty. Journal of Rural Medicine: JRM, 12(1), 33–37. doi:10.2185/jrm.2923
PMID:28593015
209
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
Naylor, J. M., Yeo, A. E., Mittal, R., Ko, V. W., & Harris, I. A. (2012). Improvements in knee range and
symptomatic and functional behavior after knee arthroplasty based on preoperative restriction in range.
The Journal of Arthroplasty, 27(6), 1100–1105. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2011.09.023 PMID:22054903
Neogi, T., & Zhang, Y. (2013). Epidemiology of osteoarthritis. Rheumatic Diseases Clinics of North
America, 39(1), 1–19. doi:10.1016/j.rdc.2012.10.004 PMID:23312408
Norkin, C. C., & White, D. J. (2009). Measurement of Joint Motion. A Guide to Goniometry. FA Davis Co.
Parent, E., & Moffet, H. (2002). Comparative responsiveness of locomotor tests and questionnaires used
to follow early recovery after total knee arthroplasty. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
83(1), 70–80. doi:10.1053/apmr.2002.27337 PMID:11782835
Parsley, B. S., Engh, G. A., & Dwyer, K. A. (1992). Preoperative flexion. Does it influence postoperative
flexion after posterior-cruciate-retaining total knee arthroplasty? Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
Research, (275), 204–210. PMID:1735215
Reimann, P., Brucker, M., Arbab, D., & Lüring, C. (2019). Patient satisfaction - A comparison between
patient-specific implants and conventional total knee arthroplasty. Journal of Orthopaedics, 16(3),
273–277. doi:10.1016/j.jor.2019.03.020 PMID:31015755
Stratford, P. W., Kennedy, D. M., & Robarts, S. F. (2010). Modelling knee range of motion post arthroplasty:
Clinical applications. Physiotherapy Canada. Physiotherapie Canada, 62(4), 378–387. doi:10.3138/
physio.62.4.378 PMID:21886379
Sullivan, M., Tanzer, M., Stanish, W., Fallaha, M., Keefe, F. J., Simmonds, M., & Dunbar, M. (2009).
Psychological determinants of problematic outcomes following Total Knee Arthroplasty. Pain, 143(1-2),
123–129. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2009.02.011 PMID:19304392
Thambiah, M. D., Nathan, S., Seow, B. Z., Liang, S., & Lingaraj, K. (2015). Patient satisfaction
after total knee arthroplasty: An Asian perspective. Singapore Medical Journal, 56(5), 259–263.
doi:10.11622medj.2015074 PMID:26034317
Tubach, F., Ravaud, P., Baron, G., Falissard, B., Logeart, I., Bellamy, N., Bombardier, C., Felson, D.,
Hochberg, M., van der Heijde, D., & Dougados, M. (2005). Evaluation of clinically relevant changes
in patient reported outcomes in knee and hip osteoarthritis: The minimal clinically important improvement.
Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 64(1), 29–33. doi:10.1136/ard.2004.022905 PMID:15208174
United States Bone and Joint Initiative. (2014). The Burden of Musculoskeletal Diseases in the United
States (BMUS). 3rd ed. Rosemont. http://www.boneandjointburden.org.
Walker, L. C., Clement, N. D., Bardgett, M., Weir, D., Holland, J., Gerrand, C., & Deehan, D. J. (2018).
The WOMAC score can be reliably used to classify patient satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty.
Knee surgery, sports traumatology, arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 26(11), 3333–3341.
doi:10.1007/s00167-018-4879-5
210
Association Between the Acquired Functioning and Personal Satisfaction
﻿
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Classification and Regression Tree: A supervised learning approach used in statistics and as a
predictive model to draw conclusions about a set of observations.
Osteoarthrosis: A non-inflammatory disease mainly caused by biological factors. The most affected
joints are the knee and hip, and the main symptoms are pain and stiffness.
Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs): This is used to assess a patient’s health status at a
particular point in time. PROMs can be completed either during an illness or while treating a health condition.
In some cases, using pre- and post-event PROMs can help measure the impact of an intervention.
Performance-Based Measures: Instruments that assess different dimensions of functioning.
Six-Minute Walk Test: A performance-based measure considered a sub-maximal exercise test used
to assess aerobic capacity and endurance. The distance covered over 6 minutes is used as the outcome
to compare changes in performance capacity.
Total Knee Arthroplasty: Also known as knee replacement, is a surgical procedure to replace the
weight-bearing surfaces of the knee joint to relieve pain and disability; it is most commonly offered
when conservative treatments do not diminish joint pain
WOMAC Index: A patient-reported outcome measure presented in a self-administered questionnaire.
It is a multidimensional outcome consisting of 24 items divided into 3 domains: pain, stiffness,
and capacity/performance at 17 activities, such as using stairs, sitting or lying, and standing upright.
211
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 13
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch013
ABSTRACT
The study aimed to understand the measures of person-centered healthcare quality variables and how they
affect patient satisfaction and responsiveness. To address the objective, the study adopted a systematic
literature approach to review 20 related studies, selected using inclusion and exclusion criteria as well
as the PRISMA flowchart, and analysed using thematic analysis. The study revealed several variables
that included institutional factors, quality dimensions, and socioeconomic factors had a relationship with
service quality in healthcare delivery which influences patients’ perception, care experiences, and the
quality of services they receive. Therefore, it is recommended that the management of hospitals consider
these variables and socioeconomic factors like age, cultural beliefs, level of education, income, and occupation
of patients to provide health personnel a better understanding of patients and treat them based
on their specific needs when providing general services.
Factors Influencing Patient
Satisfaction in Healthcare:
A Systematic Literature Review
Hawa A. Zanzeh
Social Organization, Ghana
Luis Pedro Ribeiro
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6967-0534
University of Algarve, Portugal
Anabela Magalhães Ribeiro
School of Health, University of Algarve, Portugal & University Hospital Center of Algarve, Portugal
Helena Almeida
University of Algarve, Portugal
212
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
INTRODUCTION
The satisfaction of clients is one essential factor to the success of every organisation. This is because
when a client is satisfied there is a tendency for the client to repeat the services being provided. In the
health sector, client or patient satisfaction is used to measure whether available healthcare systems meet
the health needs and expectations of patients (Adua et al., 2017).
According to Adhikary et al., (2018), patient satisfaction is a valuable indicator of quality and effective
health services as it affects the health outcome of patients. Patient satisfaction is described as the measure
of the extent to which a patient is content with the kind of services, they received from their healthcare
provider (Yaya et al., 2017). In other words, when the services rendered by healthcare providers meet or
exceed the expectation of a patient then patient satisfaction is said to be achieved.
As a key determinant of quality in healthcare delivery, patient satisfaction has been accepted worldwide
and is continuously becoming a part of standards for training healthcare providers and health institutions.
In developed countries, healthcare providers are expected to be patient-focused as it promotes patient
satisfaction (Wu et al., 2021). This is because satisfied patients are more likely to be loyal to health
service providers, build a good relationship with health systems leading to improved services and high
patient satisfaction and loyalty rate.
Thus, Adhikary et al., (2018) explain that in developed countries, one of the ways satisfaction is
improved is by paying attention to feedback from patients who visit health facilities. On the other hand,
patient satisfaction is remarkably low in most developing countries because most healthcare facilities
in Africa are not patient-centred which has led to poor quality healthcare resulting in loss of trust and
respect, resources, community apathy, patient lives, time as well as negative hospital reputation (Kokou
et al., 2015).
Also, a study revealed that there is wide diversity when it comes to patient satisfaction and this can
be seen in the area of emergency patients, inpatients, and outpatients but the study focused on inpatient
satisfaction (Chen et al., 2016). Thus, the study revealed that doctors’ service attitudes, environment,
nurses’ attitudes, expenditures, and sex were factors that influenced the rate of patient satisfaction in China.
These studies suggest that high patient satisfaction can be attained if factors that influence patient
satisfaction are identified and implemented or avoided.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
Patient satisfaction has been remarkably low in most developing countries leading to competition between
private and public health institutions. Woldeyohanes et al., (2015) stated that private health institutions
are noted to deliver quality health services as compared to public health institutions.
In a study by Chen et al., (2016), although the study was conducted on factors influencing patients’
satisfaction, the study focused on only inpatients leaving out emergency patients and outpatients, therefore,
limiting the scope of the study which can limit the generalisation of results. Similarly, the focus of Salehi
et al., (2018) study was on inpatient only even though the study adopted a systematic literature review,
limiting the review to only inpatients meant the study did not explore every aspect of a health system
to ascertain all the factors influencing patients’ satisfaction. Again, Chandra et al., (2019) study on the
factors influencing patient satisfaction also focused only on out-patients, therefore, limiting identifying
factors across health systems.
213
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
The above stated issues have created a need to conduct this study to ensure that every aspect of a
health system is captured in identifying the factors that influence patient satisfaction, to explore and
examine healthcare quality dimensions, using a systematic review with the general objective being to
understand the measures of person-centred healthcare quality variables and how these variables affect
patient satisfaction and responsiveness.
To achieve this aim, three specific objectives were developed which included examining the variables/
factors that have been indicated by literature to influence patient satisfaction in healthcare, determining
how quality dimensions affect patient satisfaction in healthcare, and determining the relationship between
socio-economic factors and service quality in healthcare delivery.
Conceptual Framework
The empirical review presents several studies that have been carried out concerning the variables/factors
that influence patient satisfaction in healthcare, how quality dimensions affect patient satisfaction in
healthcare, and the relationship between service quality and socio-economic factors in healthcare delivery.
This section presents the illustration of the relationship existing between patient satisfaction and
healthcare delivery. The relationship is however diagrammatically represented below.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the influence socio-economic factors and quality dimensions have on the
satisfaction of patients. The framework also suggests that patient satisfaction represents the dependent
variable whose outcome is dependent on the variables associated with it (independent). Thus, the independent
variable is that which causes the patient satisfaction level to change. The illustration is in line
with studies whose results identified privacy settings, facility cleanliness, interpersonal skills, quality
of medical services, price of medical services, staff competence, patient waiting time, and convenient
opening hours among others as the key drivers of patient satisfaction in healthcare (Adhikary et al.,
2018; Fang et al., 2019; Katuti, 2018).
Similarly, the framework also suggests that socioeconomic variables such as income, education, age,
and occupation influence patient’s satisfaction regarding healthcare delivery which agrees with study
results by Aloh et al. (2020), Arpey et al. (2017), as well as Xesfingi and Vozikis (2016). In the nutshell,
the two (socio-economic factors and service quality dimensions) have a relationship that significantly
influences patient satisfaction.
METHODOLOGY
This section presents the methods that are used to collect and analyse data, a research design is presented
as well as a section on quality assessment. The chapter also covers the inclusion and exclusion criteria
used in selecting studies, research evidence, selected studies, and data analysis.
Research Design
The study adopted an exploratory research design to create the foundation for understanding the measures
of person-centred healthcare quality variables. According to Creswell and Creswell (2018), an
exploratory research design is a research design that explores a topic with varying levels of depth. With
the exploratory research design, the study adopted a systematic literature review in data collection and
214
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
analysis. A systematic literature review is a critical and reproducible summary of findings from published
studies on a specific topic (Creswell, 2017).
Quality Assessment
To assess the quality of the studies used for the review, the study adopted a quality assessment tool
known as the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP). CASP is a checklist that is used to assess
the quality of the studies being included in a review, thus, it is used in studies like qualitative studies,
Figure 1. Conceptual framework of the factors influencing patient satisfaction in healthcare
Source: Author’s Construct (2021)
215
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
systematic studies, case-control studies, randomised controlled trials, and cohort studies (Critical Appraisal
Skills Programme, 2018).
The study made use of the CASP tool because it helped the researcher identify relevant studies and
avoid the situation of including low-quality studies that can affect the outcome of this research.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
This section presents the inclusion and exclusion criteria that were used to select the related studies.
Bryman and Bell (2015) describe inclusion criteria as characteristics a researcher looks out for in prospective
studies to justify their inclusion in a study whereas exclusion criteria are characteristics that
disqualify studies from being included in a review as they do not meet the characteristics a researcher
wants in prospective studies. The inclusion and exclusion criteria for the research are presented in table 1.
Research Evidence
To conduct the literature search, specific search engines were used to help identify the studies for the
review. The search engines used included Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, PubMed, and Cochrane Library.
To identify the studies, the researcher made use of Boolean operators to narrow the scope and
made the search easier. To use the Boolean operators, the study made use of conjunctions like “OR”,
“AND”, “NOT” and “AND/OR”.
Also, to narrow the search, keywords like “pdf”, “thesis”, “full-text” and “journal” were added to
the search. Other keywords used were derived from the research objectives and they include “Patient
satisfaction in healthcare”, “quality dimensions that affect patient satisfaction”, “relationship between
socio-economic factors and service quality” and “service quality in healthcare”.
In table 2, a breakdown of the search engines used is presented as well as phrases or words used for
the searches, the number of hits, and the number of studies selected from the search engines.
The study also made use of the PRISMA flow chart to give a visual presentation of how the studies
were selected for the review. According to Faggion et al. (2014), a PRISMA flow chart is a presentation
of the flow of information at the different stages of a systematic review that maps out the number of
studies that were included in the review, the number of studies excluded and why they were excluded.
The flow chart is in four stages which include, the identification stage, screening stage, eligibility stage,
and inclusion stage.
Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria
Research conducted from 2010 to 2021 Research conducted before 2010 and after 2021
Full-text studies that are presented in the English language only Studies with only abstract.
Studies published in languages other than English.
Studies that address the research objectives. Studies that do not address the research objectives.
216
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Table 2. Data research
Database Research words Scope for research Number of
hits
Studies included
in review
Google Scholar, Cochrane
Library, PubMed,
ScienceDirect
Service quality dimensions that
affect patient satisfaction
Relationship between
socioeconomic factors and
service quality
Service quality in healthcare pdf
journal full-text
Service quality and healthcare
thesis pdf
Service quality and patient
satisfaction pdf journal
Full-text studies in the English
language conducted from 2010
to 2021
68 20
Figure 2. PRISMA flow chart
217
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Selected Studies
This section presents the selected studies after the study applied the inclusion and exclusion criteria
as well as the PRISMA flow chart. The studies selected for the review are presented in table 3 which
comprises the names of the author, the title of the study, the objective of the study, the methodology,
findings, and conclusions made.
Data Analysis
The data obtained for the review was analysed using thematic analysis (Patel & Patel, 2019). The study
adopted a thematic analysis because it helped the researcher divide data into different data sets to prevent
distractions that are associated with large data sets. In analysing the data, the data were first coded
after which the themes were identified. The themes identified were then grouped into two namely major
themes and sub-themes. These themes were presented under specific objectives. The themes were further
elaborated on, supporting them with direct quotes from the studies reviewed.
RESULTS
This section presents the results obtained from the data analysed which are presented under themes.
The results are presented in the form of major themes and minor themes. The results are first presented
in Tables after which they are elaborated on and supported with direct quotes from the studies.
The results are also presented under the specific objectives of the study.
The Variables/Factors that Influence Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
In this section, the first objective which is the factors influencing patient satisfaction in healthcare is
presented. The major and minor themes identified are presented in table 4.
a. Institution-Related Factors
The study found that patient satisfaction is based on factors that are related to the institution. These
factors determine how the hospital delivers its services to the patients which in the long run affects their
level of satisfaction.
This result is supported by quotes from the studies reviewed is:
“Patients attending the private facilities had the highest level of satisfaction (i.e. 73%) and patients
attending the primary care facilities had the lowest level of satisfaction (i.e. 52%). Being satisfied with
facility cleanliness (multivariable OR 4.30; 95% CI: 3.29-5.62) and privacy settings (multivariable OR
1.68; 95% CI: 1.28-2.21) were the strongest predictors of patients’ satisfaction” (Adhikary et al., 2018);
218
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Table 3. Selected studies
Date Author Title Journal Name Objective Methodology Findings Conclusion
2018 Adhikary
et al.
Factors influencing
patients’ satisfaction at
different levels of health
facilities in Bangladesh:
Results from patient exit
interviews
PLoS ONE To determine which factors influence this
satisfaction level in Bangladesh
Quantitative
research
approach:
The study revealed that the factors that influence
patient satisfaction in healthcare include convenient
opening hours, privacy setting, facility cleanliness and
asking related questions to the providers.
The study concluded that a significant
portion of patients in Bangladesh
were not satisfied with the care
they received. Therefore it was
recommended that to increase patient
satisfaction, the focus should be on
improving providers’ interpersonal
skills, cleanliness and privacy setting.
2019 Manzoor et al.
Patient Satisfaction with
Health Care Services; An
Application of Physician’s
Behavior as a Moderator
International Journal
Environmental
Research and Public
Health
To determine patient satisfaction with
healthcare services and encompass the
physician’s behaviour as a moderation
between patient satisfaction and healthcare
services in Pakistan.
Descriptive
survey research
design
The study revealed that the behaviour of physicians and
the availability of health care services in the hospital
were the factors that affected the level of patient
satisfaction.
The study concluded that there is
a positive relationship between
physicians behaviour, availability
of health care services and patient
satisfaction.
2019 Hussain
What factors affect
patient satisfaction in
public sector hospitals:
evidence from an
emerging economy
International Journal
Environmental
Research and Public
Health.
To explore the performance of public
healthcare systems in Pakistan by
interacting with physical services
(tangible and environmental), doctorpatient
communication, and pharmacy
and laboratory services based on patient
satisfaction.
Quantitative
research
approach
The study revealed that healthcare services available
like pharmacy and laboratory, doctor-patient
communication and physical facility were factors that
influence patient satisfaction.
The study concluded that
communication gaps exist in the
doctor-patient setting and the
healthcare system is deprived of
physical facilities thus the need to
improve these areas.
2018 Aydin
Factors affecting patient
satisfaction with the
healthcare system of
Turkey
Doctoral dissertation
To identify factors affecting patient
satisfaction with the healthcare system in
Turkey.
Quantitative
research
approach
The study found that service accessibility and quality
of service provided were the factors that affected
patients satisfaction with a healthcare system.
The study concluded that
understanding patient perspectives can
help improve the quality of health.
2019 Upadhyai
et al.
A review of healthcare
service quality
dimensions and their
measurement
Journal of Health
Management
To explore knowledge as to understand
what comprises healthcare service quality,
the underlying dimensions of healthcare
service quality, and how it is measured.
Literature
review
The study revealed that the factors that influence
patients satisfaction are education, a consumers stage
in service being received
and information shared during and after the treatment.
The study concludes that
dimensionality in the healthcare
service quality is context-specific and
patients weigh them differently.
2018 Fang et al.
What is the most
important factor affecting
patient satisfaction – a
study based on gamma
coefficient
Patient Preference
and Adherence
To analyse the influencing factors of
patients satisfaction and find out the
key factors, to provide suggestions for
improving health policy
Quantitative
approach
The study revealed that medical staff service attitude,
technology, hospital convenience, medical service
utilisation, hospital facilities and environment, medical
expense and reimbursement ratio for medical expenses
were the factors that influence patient satisfaction.
Health managers should focus on
influencing factors and implement
appropriate management decisions to
improve patient satisfaction.
2017 Georgiadou &
Maditinos
Measuring the quality of
health services provided
at a Greek public
hospital through patient
satisfaction: Case study:
the general hospital of
Kavala
International Journal
of Business and
Economic Sciences
Applied Research
To examine the quality of hospital services
as perceived by patients in terms of patient
satisfaction with services.
Survey (Case
study)
The study found that the factors that influence patient
satisfaction include hospital reliability, clinical
care process, infrastructure, staff quality and social
responsibility
The study concludes that the factors
influencing patient satisfaction are
indicators of the kind of service
quality of the hospital.
2016 Kamra et al.
Factors affecting
patient satisfaction: an
exploratory study for
quality management in
the health-care sector
Total Quality
Management &
Business Excellence
To examine the factors affecting patient
satisfaction and their relationships with
respondent demographics for tertiary-level
healthcare services in Northern India
Quantitative
research
approach
The study revealed that the factors affecting patient
satisfaction include affordability and convenience,
general behaviour of doctors, nurses and staff care and
fulfilment of clinical requirements.
The study concludes that patient
satisfaction is influenced by
institutional factors thus the need to
address them.
continues on following page
219
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Table 3. Continued
Date Author Title Journal Name Objective Methodology Findings Conclusion
2017 Al-Damen
Health Care Service
Quality and Its Impact on
Patient Satisfaction “Case
of Al-Bashir Hospital”
International Journal
of Business and
Management
To measure the impact of perceived health
care service quality on patient satisfaction
at a major government hospital in Jordan.
Case study
research design
The study found that reliability, empathy and assurance
as perceived health care service quality have the most
impact on patient satisfaction.
The study concluded that moderate
levels of both perceived healthcare
service quality practises and overall
patient satisfaction at Al-Basher
hospital should be improved by getting
health workers to be committed to
their duties.
2019 Ingy, Jan, &
Ahmed
Verifying alternative
measures of healthcare
service quality
International Journal
of Health Care
Quality Assurance
To determine the best measure among
several alternatives (SERVQUAL,
weighted SERVQUAL, SERVPERF,
weighted SERVPERF) and develop a
scale that healthcare providers can use for
measurement of healthcare service quality.
Mixed method
The study revealed that reliability, assurance and
tangibility influence patient perception and their
positive behavioural intention to return to the service
provider.
The paper concludes that enhancing
satisfaction will generate patient
loyalty and positive recommendation
behaviour.
2019 Haryeni
Impact of service
quality dimensions on
patient satisfaction and
repurchase intentions in
the public health industry
Advances in
Economics, Business
and Management
Research
To examine the direct effect of service
quality (Servqual) dimension on patient
satisfaction in the public health industry in
Padang City
Quantitative
research
approach
The study found that service quality influences
customer repurchase intentions.
The study concludes that a higher
satisfaction felt by patients will
increase purchase intentions.
2017 Maqsood
Effects of hospital
service quality on
patients satisfaction and
behavioural intention of
doctors and nurses
Saudi Journal
of Medical and
Pharmaceutical
Sciences
To investigate the effect of service quality
on patient satisfaction and behavioural
intention of doctors and nurses in Lady
Willingdon Hospital, Lahore
Cross-sectional
study design
The study revealed that service quality increases
patient satisfaction and behavioural intention
The study concluded that a better
service quality satisfies patients and
makes them recommend services to
family and friends.
2020
Bentum-
Micah,
Zhiqiang,
Wenxin,
Atuahene, &
Bondzie-
Micah,
Perceived service quality,
a key to improved patient
satisfaction and loyalty
in healthcare delivery:
The Servqual Dimension
Approach
Journal of Health and
Medical Sciences
To determine how hospital service quality
affects patient satisfaction and loyalty.
Quantitative
research
approach
The study found that patient satisfaction and loyalty
are affected by hospital service quality which includes
reliability, assurance, tangibility, empathy and
responsiveness.
The study concluded that patient
satisfaction and loyalty are influenced
the quality of medical services.
2014 Kitapcia et al.
The Impact of service
quality dimensions on
patient satisfaction,
repurchase intentions
and word-of-mouth
communication in
the public healthcare
industry.
Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences
To investigate the effect of service quality
(SQ) dimensions on satisfaction, identifying
the effect of satisfaction on word of mouth
(WOM) communication and repurchase
intention (RI)
Quantitative
research
approach
The study revealed that the service quality dimension
affects satisfaction which leads to word-of-mouth and
repurchase intentions
The study concluded that service
quality can be improved by
modernising hospitals.
2020 Aloh, et al
Impact of socioeconomic
status on patient
experience on the quality
of care for ambulatory
healthcare services in
tertiary hospitals in
Southeast Nigeria.
BMC Health Services
Research
To determine how socioeconomic factors,
such as level of education and employment
status, affect patient experiences on quality
of care for ambulatory healthcare services
in teaching hospitals in southeast Nigeria.
Cross-sectional
research design
The study revealed that education and employment
status affects patients’ experiences on the quality of
care for ambulatory services.
The study concluded that full
concentration should be given to
patients socioeconomic status whiles
instituting patient-centred care.
continues on following page
220
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Date Author Title Journal Name Objective Methodology Findings Conclusion
2016 Xesfingi &
Vozikis
Patient satisfaction with
the healthcare system:
Assessing the impact
of socio-economic and
healthcare provision
factors
BMC Health Services
Research
To examine to study the relationship
between patient satisfaction of healthcare
system and a set of socio-economic and
healthcare provision indicators.
Empirical
analysis
The study revealed that there is a strong positive
association between patient satisfaction levels and
healthcare provision indicators such as nurses, public
health expenditure, physicians per 100,000 inhabitants
and the elderly.
The study concludes that there is a
strong positive association between
patient satisfaction and public health
expenditures, number of physicians
and nurses, and the age of the patient.
2017 Arpey et al.
How Socioeconomic
Status Affects Patient
Perceptions of Health
Care: A Qualitative Study
Journal of Primary
Care & Community
Health
To explore how and if low SES patients
perceive clinician bias might affect their
health care.
Qualitative
research
approach
The study revealed most of the participants perceived
that their SES affected their health care.
The study concluded that patients
perceived that the treatment provided
by their physicians, access to health
care, and the relationship they had
with their provider were affected by
their SES.
2017 Swain
How does economic and
social disadvantage affect
health?
Focus To explore Social determinants and their
effect on health and life outcome.
Literature
review
The study revealed that income level, education level
and social status affects the quality of health outcome
as it can support or constrain healthful behaviour.
The study concluded that these factors
are more strongly associated with
quality of health outcome than clinical
or behaviour care.
2017 Omorogbe
Socio-economic factors
influencing in-patient
satisfaction with health
care at the University of
Benin Teaching Hospital
(UBTH), Benin City,
Nigeria
International Journal
of Nursing, Midwife
and Health-Related
Cases
To investigate the socioeconomic factors
that influence service quality and determine
in-patient satisfaction with care at the
University of Benin Teaching Hospital
(UBTH), Benin City, Nigeria.
Cross-sectional
survey
The study found that economic constraints, staffpatient
relationship, occupation, income, spousal role,
health education and cultural beliefs influences their
use and satisfaction with the health care provided.
The study concludes that it is
important for health care professionals
to consider economic issues and
cultural beliefs of recipients who seek
health care in the hospital.
2021
Caballo,
Prabhu, Seal
& Chu
The effects of
socioeconomic status
on the quality and
accessibility of healthcare
services
Across the Spectrum
of Socio-Economics
To examine race and income as socioeconomic
factors influencing the quality
and accessibility of healthcare services.
Quantitative
research
approach
The study revealed that SES factors had significant
correlations with healthcare quality and accessibility.
The study concluded people with a
lower SES experienced lower quality
of medical care and faced more
difficulties in accessibility than their
counterparts with higher SES.
Table 3. Continued
221
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
The study further revealed that the institution-related factors are hospital setting, doctor-patient communication,
and the attitude of staff and administration. These factors were identified as minor themes
and are supported by direct quotes from the studies reviewed below:
i. Hospital Setting
From the studies, facility cleanliness, privacy setting, and availability of services like laboratory and
diagnostic care, preventive healthcare, and prenatal care were factors that influenced patient satisfaction.
“Factors like convenient opening hours, asking related questions to the providers, facility cleanliness
and privacy settings were significantly associated with patients’ satisfaction.” (Adhikary et al., 2018).
ii. Doctor-Patient Communication
The study found that good doctor-patient communication increases patient satisfaction whereas poor
doctor-patient communication decreases patient satisfaction.
“It is suggested that a significant communication gap exists in the doctor-patient setting”
(Hussain et al., 2019).
iii. Attitude of Staff
From the study, it was found that the attitude of staff had a significant effect on patient satisfaction
thus being mentioned as one of the factors affecting patient satisfaction.
“The study suggests that the physician’s behaviour significantly moderates the effect of health care
services on the satisfaction of patients” (Manzoor et al., 2019).
iv. Administration
The study also revealed that administration procedures such as waiting time, convenient opening
time, and reimbursement of medical bills were factors that influenced patients’ level of satisfaction in
healthcare.
Table 4. Major and Minor theme for objective 1
Objective Major Theme Minor Theme
The factors that influence patient satisfaction in
healthcare a. Institutional factors
i. Hospital setting
ii. Doctor-patient communication
iii. Attitude of staff
iv. Administration
222
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
“The study has revealed that factors which affect patient satisfaction are affordability, convenience,
registration and administrative procedures and infrastructure and amenities” (Kamra et al., 2015).
How Quality Dimensions Affect Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
This section presents the themes identified under the second objective which is how quality dimensions
affect patient satisfaction in healthcare. The major and minor themes identified are presented in table 5.
a. Positive Effect on Patient Behaviour
The study found that quality dimension has an effect on patient behaviour and the effect was found
to be positive. This result is supported by some a quotes from the study reviewed below:
“Results show that there is an impact of perceived health care service quality on overall patient satisfaction.
Reliability had the most influence, followed by empathy and assurance”
(Al-Damen, 2017).
The study further revealed that the effect of the quality dimension in patient satisfaction is evident in
the actions or behaviours of the patients. These behaviours are identified as minor themes.
i. Repurchase Intention of Patients
The study found that when patients are satisfied with the services they receive, it influences their
repurchase intentions. In other words, patients are willing to engage in future services by the health care
facilities.
This result is supported by some quotes like:
“Satisfaction significantly influences Repurchase Intentions” (Al-Damen, 2017);
“The study incited that patients’ satisfaction and loyalty are influenced by the quality of medical/hospital
services through its five components: reliability, assurance, tangibility, empathy and responsiveness”
(Bentum-Micah et al., 2020).
Table 5. Major and Minor theme for objective 2
Objective Major Theme Minor Theme
How quality dimension affect patient satisfaction in
healthcare a. Positive effect on patient behaviour
i. Repurchase intention
ii. Word-of-mouth
iii. Increase trust and confidence
223
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
ii. Word-of-Mouth (WOM)
The study also found that when patients are satisfied, it is easy for them to recommend the services
of the healthcare centre to family and friends.
This is supported by some quotes which includes:
“The results of this show that any hospital providing good service to their patients then will be satisfied
and recommend their friends and neighbours for treatment to this hospital” (Al, 2017);
“Empathy and assurance dimensions are positively related to customer satisfaction. However, customer
satisfaction has a significant effect on WOM and RI which are found highly related” (Kitapci et al., 2014).
iii. An Increase in Trust and Confidence of Patients
The study found that when patients are satisfied with the service they receive, it increases their trust
and confidence in the healthcare system and personnel. This is supported by the quote that states that:
“From the results, it can be concluded that patients perceive the hospital workers to acquire knowledge,
and skills as well as their ability to inspire trust and confidence. Patients are assured that they are getting
the best healthcare services from best doctors and nurses” (Al-Damen, 2017).
The Relationship Between Socioeconomic Factors
and Service Quality in Healthcare Delivery
This section presents the themes identified under the third objective which is the relationship between
socio-economic factors and service quality in healthcare delivery. The major and minor themes identified
are presented in table 6.
The study found that a positive relationship is seen in the care experience of patients, the perception
of patients and the quality of service. These results are identified as minor themes.
a. Positive Relationship
The study found that there is a positive relationship between socioeconomic factors and service quality
in healthcare delivery.
Table 6. Major and Minor theme for objective 3
Objective Major Theme Minor Theme
The relationship between socio-economic factors and service
quality in healthcare delivery
a. Positive
relationship
i. Influences care experiences of patients
ii. Influence on patients perception of
healthcare
iii. Influence on the quality of service
224
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
This result is supported with quotes from studies like:
“Social and economic factors can support or constrain healthful behaviours. For example, people with
social or economic disadvantage may not be able to easily eat a healthful diet, or provide this to their
families, if they live in a neighbourhood where such food is not easily available or affordable” (Swain,
2016);
“Our findings support that there is a strong positive association between patient satisfaction level and
healthcare provision indicators, such as nurses and physicians per 100,000 habitants, public health
expenditures and age” (Xesfingi & Vozikis, 2016).
i. Influences Care Experiences of Patients
According to some of the studies reviewed, patients’ care experiences can be positive or negative
based on their level of socio-economic factors.
This is supported by some quotes from the studies which includes:
“The mean rating of patient experience for the quality of care for ambulatory healthcare services (outpatients’
care) was 74.31 ± 0.32%. Moderate differences were observed between the hospitals assessed
for various levels of patients care, especially for waiting time, quality of doctors’ care, and overall quality
of care. Employment status was a statistically significant (p ≤ 0.05) determinant of overall patient
experience rating for the quality of care” (Aloh et al., 2020).
ii. Influence on Patient’s Perception of Healthcare
The study found that patients’ perceptions about quality healthcare service are influenced by their
socioeconomic factors. This is supported by some quotes from the studies reviewed which include:
“Most subjects perceived that their SES affected their health care. Common themes included treatment
provided, access to care, and patient-provider interaction” (Arpey et al., 2017).
iii. Influence on the Quality of Service
According to the studies, the socio-economic state of a patient determines the kind of quality of
health care service they receive:
“Social or economic disadvantage also affects the ability to access clinical care, as well as the quality
of care received. Work hours, work sick-leave policies, clinic hours, and transportation and childcare
issues can make seeing a health care professional very difficult” (Swain, 2016).
DISCUSSION
This section presents a discussion of the results obtained from the analysis.
225
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
The Variables/factors that Influence Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
The study revealed that the factors that influenced patient satisfaction in healthcare were institutional
factors which included hospital setting, doctor-patient communication, and the attitude of staff and administration.
The results imply that patient satisfaction in healthcare is a result of hospital settings like
cleanliness and privacy. In other words, when a hospital is clean and respects the privacy of patients, the
patients are more likely to be happy with the service which will translate to satisfaction.
Consequently, having effective doctor-patient communication makes patients comfortable and this
also leads to patient satisfaction. Likewise, the attitude of staff leads to patient satisfaction as a positive
attitude of staff encourages patients to want to come back to the health facility as compared to the poor
attitude of staff which discourages patients. The existence of effective administration and easy flow of
procedures like less waiting time encourages patients to seek healthcare services on time. These results
explain why patient satisfaction has become a crucial concern for understanding the needs and expectations
of patients concerning services being offered at health facilities.
How Quality Dimensions Affect Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
The study found that quality dimensions had a positive effect on patient satisfaction in healthcare. Thus,
because patients were satisfied with the quality dimension, there was repurchase intention, patients engaged
in word-of-mouth and there was an increase in trust and confidence among patients. In other words, quality
dimension like responsiveness, reliability, assurance, empathy, and tangibles affects patient satisfaction
in healthcare. For instance, how a healthcare facility administration responds quickly to concerns and
feedback from patients determines if the patient will return for future services or not. Also, having a
clean and well-structured hospital where patients can easily access wards and departments encourages
patients to come back for services. By implementing some of these quality dimensions, patients are willing
to repurchase services, recommend services to family and friends and also trust the medical team.
The Relationship between Socioeconomic Factors
and Service Quality in Healthcare Delivery
The study found that there is a positive relationship between socioeconomic factors and service quality in
healthcare delivery. The positive relationship was associated with the influence socio-economic factors
had on the perception of patients, influences on the quality of service, and influences on care experiences
of patients. According to Watiki (2014), service quality is characterised by availability, accuracy,
timeliness, responsiveness, confidentiality, amenities, and facilities among others.
Thus, the results from the current study imply that patients with high socio-economic factors like
education, occupation, and income are more likely to have or experience high service quality in healthcare
delivery whereas patients with low socio-economic factors have or experience low service quality
in healthcare delivery. Additionally, having high socio-economic factors influences one’s perception
of service quality in healthcare delivery. These results are in line with results from some studies which
include Aloh et al. (2020) who found that the employment status of the patient influenced their perception
of quality healthcare delivery.
Furthermore, education was found to influence patients’ perception of the healthcare provided. Suggesting
a positive relationship between socioeconomic factors and service quality in healthcare delivery.
226
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Arpey et al. (2017) also found that patients with low socioeconomic status such as education and income
have poor perceptions regarding the quality of service offered whilst patients with high socioeconomic
status have high perceptions regarding the delivery of healthcare service. These results suggest that
there is a positive relationship between socioeconomic factors and service quality in healthcare delivery.
CONCLUSION
This study aimed to understand the measures of person-centred healthcare quality variables and how they
affect patient satisfaction and responsiveness. Therefore, the study developed three specific objectives
which included examining the variables/factors that have been indicated by literature to influence patient
satisfaction in healthcare, determining how quality dimensions affect patient satisfaction in healthcare, and
determining the relationship between socio-economic factors and service quality in healthcare delivery.
To address these objectives, the study adopted a systematic literature approach as the study design
and a qualitative research approach in data collection and analysis. The study made use of only secondary
data from related studies found in journals, books, and online articles. The studies were selected using
inclusion and exclusion criteria as well as the PRISMA flow chart.
In all, 20 related studies were included in the review and presented in a Table under the specific objectives.
To analyse the data obtained from the studies reviewed, the study made use of thematic analysis.
Based on the thematic analysis, themes were identified and categorised as major and minor themes which
were presented under the specific objectives. The themes were further elaborated on, supporting them
with direct quotes from the studies reviewed.
The findings obtained from the review are presented as:
The Variables/Factors That Have Been Indicated by Literature
to Influence Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
The study found that institutional factors which included hospital setting, doctor-patient communication,
and the attitude of staff and administration were the factors that influenced patient satisfaction in
healthcare.
How Quality Dimensions Affect Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
The study revealed that quality dimensions had a positive effect on patient satisfaction in healthcare as
patients had repurchase intention, patients engaged in talking about the healthcare service and there was
an increase in trust and confidence among patients.
The Relationship Between Socio-Economic Factors
and Service Quality in Healthcare Delivery
The study revealed that there was a positive relationship between socioeconomic factors and service
quality in healthcare delivery. This is because there was an influence of socio-economic factors on the
perception of patients, on the quality of service, and the care experiences of patients.
227
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
The following conclusions are made based on the findings, the study concludes that there are institutional
factors that influence patient satisfaction in healthcare.
The institutional factors include administration, doctor-patient communication, and the attitude of
staff and hospital settings like privacy, convenience and cleanliness. Also, quality dimensions like responsiveness,
reliability, assurance, tangibles, and empathy have a positive effect on patient satisfaction in
healthcare. This is because when patients are satisfied with the quality of healthcare service they receive,
they have repurchase intention, have trust and confidence in the hospital systems, and also recommend
the services to family and friends.
Finally, the study concludes that there is a positive relationship between socioeconomic factors and
service quality in healthcare delivery. This is because socioeconomic factors of patients influence their
perception, care experiences, and the quality of service they receive.
The following recommendations are given based on the findings obtained from the study
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendations for Practice
i. The study revealed that socioeconomic factors have a positive effect on service quality in healthcare
delivery. It is therefore recommended that the management of hospitals consider socioeconomic
factors like age, cultural beliefs, level of education, income, and occupation of patients when
delivering services. By considering socioeconomic factors, health personnel will have a better
understanding of patients and treat them based on their specific needs than providing general
services. By providing services based on specific needs, patients will be pleased with the service
they receive and this will affect their level of satisfaction.
ii. The study also found that quality dimensions had a positive effect on patient satisfaction in healthcare.
Therefore, it is recommended that suggestions from patients should be solicited to provide
practical ideas for the effective delivery of quality services that meet the specifications of patients.
In other words, taking feedback from patients should be promoted in the hospital to guide management
on how to provide quality services for patients irrespective of their socioeconomic status.
Recommendations for Future Studies
i. The use of only secondary data had limitations such as the dimensions of quality service in healthcare,
which could not be fully explored. This is because not all the studies reviewed explored all
the dimensions of quality service. Based on this, the study recommends that future studies should
make use of primary data by adopting qualitative or quantitative research approaches in data collection
and analysis. With these approaches, the researcher can explore all the dimensions of quality
service in healthcare.
ii. Also, by using a systematic literature review, the study had limitations such as not fully exploring
all domains of patient care or addressing specific areas of patient care. Thus, the results cannot be
generalised. Based on this, the study recommends that future studies should consider either qualitative
or quantitative approaches as by collecting primary data, the study can focus on all domains
or specific areas of patient care. This will make it easier for the generalisation of results.
228
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
iii. The studies reviewed were carried out before the COVID-19 pandemic thus they did not include
the effect of the crisis on hospitals’ ability to provide quality service. Therefore, it is recommended
that future studies should explore the role of COVID-19 on service quality and how it affects patient
satisfaction.
REFERENCES
Adhikary, G., Shawon, M. S. R., Ali, M. W., Shamsuzzaman, M., Ahmed, S., Shackelford, K. A., Woldeab,
A., Alam, N., Lim, S. S., Levine, A., Gakidou, E., & Uddin, M. J. (2018). Factors influencing patients’
satisfaction at different levels of health facilities in Bangladesh: Results from patient exit interviews.
PLoS One, 13(5), e0196643. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0196643 PMID:29768441
Adua, E., Frimpong, K., Li, X., & Wang, W. (2017). Emerging issues in public health: A perspective
on Ghana’s healthcare expenditure, policies and outcomes. The EPMA Journal, 8(3), 197–206.
doi:10.100713167-017-0109-3 PMID:29021830
Al, M. M. (2017). Effects of hospital service quality on patients satisfaction and behavioural intention
of doctors and nurses. Saudi J. Med. Pharm. Sci, (July). doi:10.21276/SJMPS
Al-Damen, R. (2017). Health Care Service Quality and Its Impact on Patient Satisfaction “Case of Al-
Bashir Hospital.”. International Journal of Business and Management, 12(9), 136. doi:10.5539/ijbm.
v12n9p136
Aloh, H. E., Onwujekwe, O. E., Aloh, O. G., Okoronkwo, I. L., & Nweke, C. J. (2020). Impact of
socioeconomic status on patient experience on quality of care for ambulatory healthcare services in
tertiary hospitals in Southeast Nigeria. BMC Health Services Research, 20(1), 1–9. doi:10.118612913-
020-05332-0 PMID:32456633
Arpey, N. C., Gaglioti, A. H., & Rosenbaum, M. E. (2017). How socioeconomic status affects patient
perceptions of health care: A qualitative study. Journal of Primary Care & Community Health, 8(3),
169–175. doi:10.1177/2150131917697439 PMID:28606031
Bentum-Micah, G., & Ma, Z. (n.d.). Perceived service quality, a key to improved patient satisfaction
and loyalty in healthcare delivery: the servqual dimension approach. Papers.Ssrn.Com. https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3603338
Bruyneel, L., Li, B., Ausserhofer, D., Lesaffre, E., Dumitrescu, I., Smith, H. L., Sloane, D. M., Aiken,
L. H., & Sermeus, W. (2015). Organization of Hospital Nursing, Provision of Nursing Care, and Patient
Experiences With Care in Europe. Medical Care Research and Review: MCRR, 72(6), 643–664.
doi:10.1177/1077558715589188 PMID:26062612
Chandra, S., Ward, P., & Mohammadnezhad, M. (2019). Factors Associated With Patient Satisfaction
in Outpatient Department of Suva Sub-divisional Health Center, Fiji, 2018: A Mixed Method Study.
Frontiers in Public Health, 7(JUL), 183. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2019.00183 PMID:31312630
229
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Chen, H., Li, M., Wang, J., Xue, C., Ding, T., Nong, X., Liu, Y., & Zhang, L. (2016). Factors influencing
inpatients’ satisfaction with hospitalization service in public hospitals in Shanghai, People’s Republic
of China. Patient Preference and Adherence, 10, 469–477. doi:10.2147/PPA.S98095 PMID:27110101
Creswell, J. W. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches.
Sage Pubications.
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. (2018). CASP (Systematic Literature). Check List.
Faggion, C. M. Jr, Liu, J., Huda, F., & Atieh, M. (2014). Assessment of the quality of reporting in abstracts
of systematic reviews with meta-analyses in periodontology and implant dentistry. Journal of
Periodontal Research, 49(2), 137–142. doi:10.1111/jre.12092 PMID:23668725
Fang, J., Liu, L., & Fang, P. (2019). What is the most important factor affecting patient satisfaction - a
study based on gamma coefficient. Patient Preference and Adherence, 13, 515–525. doi:10.2147/PPA.
S197015 PMID:31114168
Georgiadou, V. A., & Maditinos, D. (2017). Measuring the Quality of Health Services Provided at a
Greek Public Hospital through Patient Satisfaction. Case Study: The General Hospital of Kavala. Quality
Management EJournal, 10(2), 60–72. doi:10.25103/ijbesar.102.06
Ghotbabadi, A. R., Feiz, S., & Baharun, R. (2015). Service Quality Measurements: A Review. International
Journal of Academic Research in Business & Social Sciences, 5(2). doi:10.6007/IJARBSS/v5-i2/1484
Haryeni, & Yendra, N. (2019). Impact of Service Quality Dimensions on Patient Satisfaction and Repurchase
Intentions in the Public Health Industry. 97(Piceeba), 456–465. doi:10.2991/piceeba-19.2019.52
Hussain, A., Sial, M. S., Usman, S. M., Hwang, J., Jiang, Y., & Shafiq, A. (2019). What Factors Affect
Patient Satisfaction in Public Sector Hospitals: Evidence from an Emerging Economy. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(6), 994. doi:10.3390/ijerph16060994
Kalaja, R., Myshketa, R., & Scalera, F. (2016). Service Quality Assessment in Health Care Sector: The
Case of Durres Public Hospital. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 235, 557–565. doi:10.1016/j.
sbspro.2016.11.082
Kamra, V., Singh, H., & Kumar De, K. (2015). Factors affecting patient satisfaction: an exploratory
study for quality management in the health-care sector. Taylor and Francis. Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.108
0/14783363.2015.1057488, doi:10.1080/14783363.2015.1057488
Katuti, C. S. (2018). Patient Level of Satisfaction with Perceived Health Service Quality in Nyandarua
County Referral Hospital. Kenyatta University.
Kitapci, O., Akdogan, C., & Dortyol, İ. T. (2014). The Impact of Service Quality Dimensions on Patient
Satisfaction, Repurchase Intentions and Word-of-Mouth Communication in the Public Healthcare
Industry. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 148, 161–169. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.030
Kokou, P., van Tonder, E., & Roberts-Lombard, M. (2015). Patient Satisfaction Measurement For In-
Hospital Services Delivered By Nurses: Guidelines For Improving Practice In Africa. American Journal
of Health Sciences, 6(1), 23–36. doi:10.19030/ajhs.v6i1.9267
230
Factors Influencing Patient Satisfaction in Healthcare
﻿
Manzoor, F., Wei, L., Hussain, A., Asif, M., & Shah, S. I. A. (2019). Patient satisfaction with health care
services; an application of physician’s behavior as a moderator. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 16(18), 3318. doi:10.3390/ijerph16183318 PMID:31505840
Mosadeghrad, A. M. (2014). Factors influencing healthcare service quality. International Journal of
Health Policy and Management, 3(2), 77–89. doi:10.15171/ijhpm.2014.65 PMID:25114946
Omorogbe, C. E. (2018). Socio-Economic Factors Influencing in-Patient Satisfaction With Health Care
At the University of Benin Teaching Hospital (Ubth), Benin City, Nigeria. Ijnmhrc, 4(4), 63–80. http://
www.eajournals.org/wp-content/uploads/Socio-Economic-Factors-Influencing-in-Patient-Satisfaction-
With-Health-Care-at-the-University-of-Benin-Teaching-Hospital-UBTH-Benin-City-Nigeria.pdf [Accessed
19/12/19]
Patel, M., & Patel, N. (2019). Exploring Research Methodology: Review Article. International Journal
of Research and Review Keywords: Research, Methodology, Research Methodology, 6(March), 48–55.
www.ijrrjournal.com
Salehi, A., Jannati, A., Nosratnjad, S., & Heydari, L. (2018). Factors influencing the inpatients satisfaction
in public hospitals: A systematic review. Bali Medical Journal, 7(1), 17. doi:10.15562/bmj.v7i1.533
Souca, M. L. (2011). SERVQUAL-Thirty years of research on service quality with implications for
customer satisfaction. International Conference “Marketing from Information to Decision” 4th Edition,
420–429. Research Gate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/346470601
Swain, G. R. (n.d.). How does socioeconomic disadvantage drive poor health outcomes? 33(1), 2016–2033.
www.countyhealthrankings.org/our-
Watiki, C. (2014). Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction in Hotels in Nairobi. University of Nairobi.
http://erepository.uonbi.ac.ke/handle/11295/75971
Woldeyohanes, T. R., Woldehaimanot, T. E., Kerie, M. W., Mengistie, M. A., & Yesuf, E. A. (2015).
Perceived patient satisfaction with in-patient services at Jimma University Specialized Hospital, Southwest
Ethiopia Public Health. BMC Research Notes, 8(1), 1–8. doi:10.118613104-015-1179-8
Wu, Q., Amporfro, D. A., Boah, M., Yingqi, S., Wabo, T. M. C., Zhao, M., & Nkondjock, V. R. N.
(2021). Patients satisfaction with healthcare delivery in Ghana. BMC Health Services Research, 21.
Xesfingi, S., & Vozikis, A. (2016). Patient satisfaction with the healthcare system: Assessing the impact
of socio-economic and healthcare provision factors. BMC Health Services Research, 16(1), 94.
doi:10.118612913-016-1327-4 PMID:26979458
Yaya, S., Bishwajit, G., Ekholuenetale, M., Shah, V., Kadio, B., & Udenigwe, O. (2017). Urban-rural
difference in satisfaction with primary healthcare services in Ghana. BMC Health Services Research,
17(1), 776. doi:10.118612913-017-2745-7 PMID:29178876
Yeilada, F., & Direktör, E. (2010). Health care service quality: A comparison of public and private hospitals.
African Journal of Business Management, 4(6), 962–971. http://www.academicjournals.org/AJBM
231
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 14
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch014
ABSTRACT
In the last few years, many advances in sensing usage have been developed, and their application on
healthcare is substantially growing due to many factors, but the most important one is the patient’s
physical parameters data gathering for remote monitorization and intervention. Sensing and actuation
as a service using clouds as basis may provide a platform to directly connect the patient’s sensors to
the health care providers and fast monitor or intervene in case of alarm, especially on elderly people.
In Portugal, all patient’s data is collected to a personal patient data register (health portal), that can
be seen by any medical and technical health staff working on public institutions. This study aims to
design a framework using sensing and actuation as a service on clouds able to provide data integration
into the Portuguese National Patient Data Register and alarm triggering for fast medical intervention.
INTRODUCTION
The internet of things (IoT) it’s a collection of Things (sensors, cellphones, GPS locators, RFID systems
or other smart objects) that are identifiable, trackable, and connected to the internet, providing a large
scale of information access.
Different protocol stacks and ecosystems were developed for IoT, resulting in a communication
incompatibility, contributing for a fragmented scenario without middleware gateways. Web-of-Things
emerged from this scenario to provide connection between Things using web technologies, enabling
their access, discovery and management (Fortino et al., 2017; Guinard et al., 2016).
Due to the huge amount of data generated from all constraint devices (Things) connected that can
be accessed and managed from the internet, new challenges occur in storage and processing all data.
Sensing and Actuation
as a Service for Health
Data Integration
Joel Guerreiro
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7471-4928
Universidade do Algarve, Portugal
232
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
Cloud computing, which is a set of architectures and models that concentrate software and hardware
resources, offering them as-a-Service to users, such as Platform as-a-Service (PaaS) which provides
computer platforms that can include operating system, programming languages, databases, web servers,
and other environments, Software as-a-Service (SaaS) where the cloud manages the infrastructure and
a software may be deployed for client usage or Infrastructure as-a-Service (IaaS) that aims to provide
virtual machines, servers, storage, load balancers scalable and redundant depending on users requests,
could be the answer to these questions (Guerreiro et al., 2019).
Sensing as-a-Service (Se-aaS) surfaced from this scenario to respond to these challenges as a business
model, allowing sensor owners to share data into a cloud of sensor Things to be collected by data
consumers, paying it as-a-service. The authors Distefano et al. (2012), presented a step towards to a
creation of a Cloud of sensors and actuators (devices and/or cloud can perform actions), by introducing
an architectural scheme that responded to the challenges using smart devices, Sensing and Actuation
as-a-Service (SAaaS).
The Portuguese Health Ministry created a Health Portal on which all public medical and health technical
staff can access patient’s data, exams, reports, and analysis performed inside the Nacional Health System
(NHS) Institutions, so that when someone is attended anywhere in the country, all health professionals
can access the data registered, diminishing costs, being more effective and productive. This platform is
essential for patients and medical staff to visualize patient’s medical data, but only the ones registered
on public NHS Institutions, there is no connection to private health institutions.
Nowadays, the aging of population and growing life expectation is a serious concern to all national
health systems, not only to create health conditions in the health system but to provide care to elder
people. In Portugal, the aging index grow from 27.5% in 1961 to 182.7% in 2021 (Pordata, 2022), being
essential to create conditions to promote health and wellbeing, increasing functional capacity, autonomy,
and life quality to people while they are aging.
Many studies have been addressing the connection of sensors and technology to the aging, such as
remote health monitoring, fall detection and elder surveillance.
This study intends to propose the design of a preliminary framework model which allows the connection
between all Things that can remote monitor, detect and actuate in elder’s health, retrieving and
integrating data into the Health Portal System to be available to all medical and technical staff anywhere
in Portugal.
The proposed framework model is suitable for IoT SAaaS business models, supporting multi-sensing
client applications and multi-sensor supplier’s deployment, Thing’s mashups, and multiple domains
integration.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In section Cloud-Based Sensing and Actuation
as-a-Service the main system architectures and functionalities are discussed. Section Related Work
discusses the work done on the connection between sensor systems and elders health. Section Framework
Model presents the design of the framework model proposed to interconnect all Things into the
Portuguese Health Portal and section Conclusion, concludes the article.
CLOUD-BASED SENSING AND ACTUATION AS-A-SERVICE
Cloud computing objectives is to provide on-demand computing and storage resources to users, using
virtualization techniques and proving an as-a-Service business model.
233
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
Se-aaS was introduced by Sheng et al. (2013) and aimed to provide sensing services on cloud environment,
using mobile phones, describing system functionalities and tasks to implement the system.
The functionalities described by the authors for a Se-aaS sensor cloud were:
• Web interface: it should have a web interface to collect requests from users.
• Generating sensing Tasks: the cloud should perform generic sensing tasks containing the request
information in a standard format.
• Tracking mobile phones: the data should be shared to all smart phones, so the sensor location
and energy status should be available and have a way to push the tasks into the mobile phones for
data collection.
• Recruiting Mobile Phones: Sharing the mobile sensors of the smart phone was the main idea,
therefore a way or mechanism to recruit and incentive mobile phone users to share their sensors
must be implemented.
• Scheduling of Sensing Activities: There must exist an algorithm or policy to schedule sensing
activities on the recruited mobile phones, for data to be collected.
• Managing Sensors: The sensors on the mobile phone must be managed to collect and store data
into the cloud.
• Processing and Storing Data: A database is required to store the collected data from the mobile
phones sensors and to be able to deliver reports to the users.
The authors, Sheng et al. (2013) also introduced scheduling algorithms to address sensor energy issues
to load sensor data into the smartphone platforms and an incentive system to attract users in participating
in the project, being therefore, the first approach to Se-aaS business model.
The Se-aaS model emerged from the processing and storage needs and has three main actors (Distefano
et al., 2012), Sensor Providers or Node Owners, Cloud of Things or Sensing Cloud and Data Consumers
or Software Application. Figure 1.
Those three main actors are also the three architectural infrastructural layers (Perera et al., 2014) of
the Se-aaS model:
Figure 1. Se-aaS generic environment
234
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
• Sensor Providers and Physical Sensors or Things: This layer consists in sensors or actuated
sensors owned by sensor providers that may register those devices in the Se-aaS cloud infrastructure
to share sensor data. The providers must maintain, manage and control the Things to be
always available and being able to share the data they gather (Kim et al., 2016).
• Cloud Infrastructure or Cloud of Things: There are several types or servers on a cloud infrastructure
to process, store and provide the services (Figure 2):
◦◦ Portal Server: This server objective is to have a web interface that responds to user’s logins,
sensor owners and data consumers. Sensor owners can register or deregister their Things and
view the usage of their devices obtaining detailed reports. Data consumers can subscribe
sensor or sensor groups and access their data, controlling how many times data must be retrieved,
check sensor or sensor groups status and the unsubscribed whenever the consumer
desires. The server also forwards the consumers sensor subscriptions to the Provisioning
Server for virtual machines creation, modification, or removal, depending on the action (Kim
et al., 2016).
◦◦ Data Storage Server: This server main goal is to ensure data storage in the databases of
the user’s information, the sensors or group of sensors or the gathered sensor data (Kim et
al 2016).
◦◦ Monitoring and Management Server: is responsible for providing a solution that responds
to multiple consumers (multi-tenant solution) on the cloud, be able to perform scaling and
load-balancing between the created virtual machines to respond to consumers requests and
available sensors or group of sensors. This server is also responsible for retrieving sensor’s
data and check sensor’s health status, send the data to the Data Storage Server to be stored
and available for consumer usage. The monitoring and management server is the most important
in the infrastructure since the provisioning is dynamic and based on live physical
sensors, so it must have a location and status aware knowledge base for the Provisioning
Server not to use the offline sensors while provisioning them to the consumer (Kim et al.,
2016).
◦◦ Provisioning Server: This server is responsible for the creation of virtual sensor groups
(groups of sensors with the same functionality and similar properties) on-demand, depending
on consumers requests registered on the Portal Server. The Provisioning Server will create
and reserve virtual machines when receiving the request from the Portal Server. When
the virtual machine is ready, the virtual sensor group is provisioned and stored on the Data
Storage Server, for the Portal Server be show the data retrieved to the consumer (Kim et al.,
2016).
• Consumers: The consumers through the web page available by the Portal Server will place their
requests and start receiving real-time analytics from the sensor or virtual sensor groups. Consumers
can download the data or integrate through Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) to connect
to their own applications (Kim et al., 2016).
235
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
The workflow within this model starts with the register of Things by the sensor owners using the
Portal Server as the interface. Those Things are stored by the Data Storage Server on the databases after
a location and status check performed by the Monitoring and Management Server.
On the other side, the clients register themselves on the Portal Server and place their sensor data
requests and the Provisioning Server will create the virtual sensor groups that better can respond to the
consumers request, using the information registered on the Data Storage Server where all sensors are
stored on the databases. The Monitoring and Management Server starts the data retrieval in real-time
and stores the data on the Data Storage Server databases. The results will be visualized by the consumers
using the Portal server.
Kim et al. (2016) describe the Se-aaS infrastructure functionalities, adapted from Sheng, Jian Tang
and Xue (2013):
Figure 2. Se-aaS architecture
Figure 3. Virtualization Layers in Se-aaS
236
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
• Virtualization: Virtualization of sensors is used in the dynamic provisioning enabling device
management and customization by consumers requests, where a single Thing can be linked to one
or to multiple consumers. Virtual sensor groups can be created and provided for specific usage
(Figure 3).
• Dynamic Provisioning: Consumers can request a large set of devices on each request, due to
the dynamic on-demand creation on provisioning of virtual sensors that respond to one or more
requests and one or more consumers. The provisioned virtual sensors properties must be as close
as possible to the consumers requests.
• Multi-Tenancy: Multi-tenant architectures respond to a set of consumers and permits the sharing
of sensors or Things and the retrieved data for consumers usage, providing dedicated instances for
each sensor provider.
Se-aaS in smart cities context is discussed by Perera et al. (2014), addressing technological, economic
and social perspectives. Petrolo et al. (2017), propose also, in smart cities context, a global approach
for sensor semantic annotation at the cloud for sensor aggregation and create a technological agnostic
architecture to integrate and deploy Things, ignoring their physical and logical architecture. Their approach
foresees the convergence of IoT platforms and ecosystems needed for smart cities.
Hsu et al. (2014) and Misra et al. (2014) address semantic selection. The first proposes a context-aware
sensing service architecture applying selection and search options for user preferences, accuracy, energy
consumption, sensing range, etc. The author proved that by the selection of requirements and parameters
using semantics, decrease power consumptions in comparison with traditional search schemes. Misra et
al (2014), designed a framework for selection of the optimal gateway in a sensor cloud using semantics
applied on remote health monitoring distributed on different geographic locations.
Multimedia Se-aaS was discussed by Lai, Chao et al. (2013), Lai, Wang et al. (2013), Wang et al.
(2017) and Xu and Mao (2013). The first work developed a real-time transcoding mechanism for HTTP
live streaming using cloud as basis and hand-held devices like mobile phones or tablets. Xu Y. and
Mao S. (2013) discuss the energy consumption, offload computing tasks, limited bandwidth, Quality
of Experience, privacy and security technical challenges and how to minimize costs using rich media
applications on mobile devices in a cloud computing environment.
Lai, Wang et al. (2013), discuss an approach on network and device Quality of Service using cloud
based mobile streaming. The main goal was to provide multimedia data using interactive mobile streaming
services adjusting the transmission frequency interactively and multimedia transcoding dynamically
to avoid power waste and low bandwidth issues.
Wang et al. (2017), presented a resource saving cloud-edge IoT and fogs Multimedia Sensing as a
Service (MSaaS). The authors developed a framework for cloud edges and fogs that analyses frequency,
data dependencies, temporal domains, and interaction in order to optimize resource allocation at the
cloud-edge IoT and fogs.
Se-aaS model works on cloud for sensors data to be available for cloud client’s accesses, similarly to
other aaS models. Resources must be registered by sensor owners and dynamically provisioned on client
or data consumers demand, being as flexible and fast as possible to be afterwards available for other
requests. The data consumers or cloud clients must register themselves through a subscription and the
costs they have are directly indexed on the Things and data they access and collect. The sensor owners
must be incentivized to register their Things and they will collect their return (amount of money) also
237
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
indexed to the accessed done on their sensors. This is the business model. Challenges to design and plan
such a system are:
• The complexity of the system should be hidden, and services or applications must work without
much overhead.
• The data collection must be on a low cost-of-service per consumer and prepared to be scalable.
• Dynamic resource provisioning to client requests must be efficient.
Several models were developed to optimize resource allocation in Se-aaS, Guerreiro et al. (2019),
developed a model where embedded mashups (workflow wiring together a set of Things) into the cloud
to diminish delays of multiple travelling sessions between cloud and consumer and created a resource
allocation heuristic with three different strategies to compare which one would outperform each other.
The same authors (Guerreiro et al. 2020), in another article, developed an adequate mathematical
optimization model for resource allocation and a heuristic that outperformed the state-of-the-art method,
being very close to the mathematical optimization model, fulfilling more consumer requests, using less
devices with lower materialization costs, meaning that the allocated Things are very near to the properties
requested by the consumers.
Sensing and Actuation as-a-Service is a cloud computing business model, where sensor providers
register their smart Things to provide real-time data to consumers with scalability, security and redundancy,
assuring multi-suppliers sensor providers and multi-consumers data retrieval, while the cloud
infrastructure assures storage, processing, virtualization and security.
RELATED WORK
Many studies have been discussed throughout the years that support the interaction between sensor
systems and elderly care.
Using time series clustering to detect elder daily routines, an algorithm to identify day-to-day activities
deviations in patterns and generate alerts to healthcare providers was developed by Hajihashemi et
al. (2014). Using time series sensors with a hierarchical cluster approach to extract periodic patterns
in a retirement community in Columbia MO, having a motion pressure and depth sensors network, the
study aimed to quantify bathroom visits and verify the duration, the number of visits and the average
time between visits. The computational algorithm developed by the authors successfully extracted routine
bathroom visits of the elderly residents. Using the hierarchical clustering approach, they detect the
frequent sensor sequences with a high-rate average of 0.84, therefore supporting the robustness of the
used method.
An approach on surveillance with noncontact sensors framework was presented by Wang (2017) to
provide a temporal and spatial context on elder’s daily routines using passive infrared (PIR) sensors. The
conclusion of the authors study is that their system shows that using a single type of ambient sensors it
is possible to detect and monitor the elder’s daily routines and routine changes. The proposed method is
accepted by older people since it’s less intrusive due to the noncontact sensor’s usage.
A hybrid fusion-based data sensor system to determining elder’s daily activity and routines is proposed
by the same authors, Wang et al. (2018). In this case, the authors propose a hybrid sensor-based human
activity recognition (HAR) using a unique data fusion method combining wearable sensors, to identify
238
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
specific daily routines and ambient sensors for surveillance. The room-level location information is used
in the data fusion to trigger the classification models trained by the wearable data. The development
of a classification algorithm using vector machines allows the goal to explore and improve recognition
accuracy. Results demonstrate that the data fusion between the wearable and ambient sensors resulted
in a improved accuracy compared with the scenario of recognizing all the activities only with wearable
sensors.
A preliminary study for remote healthcare system with activity classification for elder people using
body sensors was presented by Koçak et al. (2018) using radial basis function networks, k-nearest neighbor,
and vector machines as the support basis of the study. The results showed that the best classification
performance was 99.8%, but with the application of the feature selection, the performance decreased
to 99.4%, nevertheless, with this study, it was possible to create a remote-controlled care system that
reports elder people information to family or care takers when hazardous situations occur, such as falling
or fainting and directly assigns a medical emergency unit to the corresponding address in such cases.
Casagrande et al. (2018) introduced a preliminary sensor event prediction system using recurrent
neural networks with a Long Short-Term Memory in smart homes for elder people using binary sensors
to predict the event in a sequence. The authors used in an apartment fifteen sensors, seven motion sensors
in each area of the house and on the bed to determine if the elder is in the bed, four magnetic sensors on
the doors and cutlery drawer and four power sensors on appliances, nightstand lam, coffee machine, TV
and living room reading lamp. The sensors were connected using a wireless network into a Raspberry
Pi 3 that receives the data and transfers it onto a secure server storage. A comparison was done with the
results of the implemented system with the Long Short-Term Memory network to the baseline method
from similar work previously done. The implemented system obtained a peak prediction accuracy of
69% and 75% for 13 and 5 sets of sensors, while the accuracy of the baseline was 58%. The results show
that a much higher prediction accuracy is required before such algorithms are applicable.
Xu et al. (2013) discussed another important elderly issue, which is the elder falls. The authors proposed
a body sensor network communication system with an acceleration sensor node placed on the elder’s
head, a pulse sensor on the wrist, two plantar pressure sensors on the ankle and a sink node on the waist
to collect real-time information and communicate with a remote computer through a Bluetooth module.
The system detected correctly if a fall event occurred, or a pulse change and the hardware implemented
provided a good platform for the elder fall algorithm research.
A fall characteristic monitoring system based on machine learning was proposed by Hsieh et al.
(2018), to support clinical professionals to assess fall events causes and create prevention strategies,
consisting in a high accuracy fall event detection and fall direction identification algorithm. The authors
used a tri-axial accelerometer to measure motion acceleration and a fall event detection algorithm that
detected seven types of falls and six types of Daily Living Activities (DLA). The authors were able to
predict falls with a precision of 98.67% and 97.57% for fall direction identification accuracy.
A deep-learning based near-fall detection algorithm for fall risk monitoring classification system
using a single inertial measurement unit was presented by Choi et al. (2017) et al to categorize three
classes, falls, near-falls and DLA using accelerometers and gyroscope sensors to acquire acceleration
and angular velocity signals. The neural network architecture proposed with a modified directed acyclic
graph convolutional neural network which captured sensor’s data, was able to predict fall, near-fall and
DLA with 7% more accuracy than the traditional neural networks systems. In near-falls case, the results
reached a total of 98% accuracy. The authors conclude their study adding that the deep-learning algo239
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
rithm developed, trained by combining acceleration and angular velocity, showed better performance
then other algorithms in pre-impact fall detection.
Jiang (2022) addressed the construction of an intelligent system for elderly’s health and care in a
physical medicine and smart sensors integration perspective in China urban communities. Jiang (2022)
proposed a combination of medical resources and elderly care resources, rehabilitation and social resources
model integrating smart health and elderly care smart devices into a service platform software
able to realize health management services, elderly care services and telemedicine services based on IoT,
to provide information support for China Government to build a complete health services and guarantee
elder’s health services and daily life remote monitoring.
Hong et al. (2008) presented a novel method to recognize elder’s activities of daily living with accelerometers
and RFID sensor. The objective was the classification of five body states with a decision
tree and the detection of RFID tagged objects hand motion information with a Bluetooth based wireless
triaxial accelerometers and iGrabber RFID reader. Their results show that the system can determine
whether the elder can live normally or not with the reports being sent to the remote family.
The development of cognitive sensors was addressed by Gaddam et al. (2010) based on an intelligent
wireless sensor network to monitor the living environment of the elderly people when living alone to
provide a safe, sound and secure ecosystem at home. The objective was to deploy inexpensive smart
and cognitive sensors for monitoring the activities of the appliances with features to include the coverage,
small obstructiveness’s, that would be easy to deploy, uses reduced energy consumption, low on
maintenance and more acceptable by the elderly community. The system used radio frequency with a
controller and an interface control software that recognized the activities of daily living and lifestyle of
the elders to capture abnormal behaviors.
Another approach on elder care was also presented by Gaddam et al. (2011), with a home monitoring
system based on a cognitive sensor network to detect electronic device usage, bed usage patterns, water
flow and others, including a panic button. The main goal was to detect any abnormal pattern in elder
daily activities around their houses. The system generated warning messages to the care giver whenever
any abnormal behavior was detected.
A fall prevention system was developed by Sumi et al. (2019), introducing an accelerometer algorithm,
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) modules in strategic locations and an alarm system to notify caretakers.
The BLE sensors detected and send warning to the server which triggered the alarm system, preventing
the elderly fall.
Another approach on fall detection during the usage of a walking assistant robot was studied by Wang
and Zhang (2015) on where the authors proposed a multi-sensor data fusion based on a neural network,
making full use of tactile-slip sensor, acceleration sensor and gyroscope to acquire the needed data and
falling risk. The multi-sensor data fusion system structure basic principle was using multi-sensor data
complement, process information in time and space to achieve interpretation consistency of the observed
environment. The fusion center based on neural network was designed to use the different motion sensors
characteristics and measurements to realize data fusion. Results show that the algorithm developed
by the authors was better than using a single sensor for fall prediction and the system can recognize the
fall tendency of the elders.
An investigation on the performance of a wearable distributed deflection sensor in arterial pulse
waveform measurement was presented by Wang et al. (2017). The sensor was built on a flexible material
with a polymer microstructure and an electrolyte-enabled resistive transducer array, that enabled the
pressurization of the sensor by two fingers on the artery to register the radial and carotid pulse signals.
240
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
Signal processing algorithms were developed to extract the key tonometry parameters and calculate the
pulse wave velocity and radial and carotid augmentation index. The results show variations of gender,
hypertension and the calculated radial and carotid pulse wave velocity has a positive correlation with
age, gender and hypertension, making this sensor a potential and unexpensive point-of-care for untrained
individuals to keep track of their cardiovascular condition.
Daher et al (2017) proposed an elder tracking and fall detection system using smart tiles. The usage
of force sensors and three-axis accelerometers concealed under intelligent tiles was the authors strategy
to detect and recognize human activities such as walking, standing, sitting, lying, down, falling and the
transitions between those activities. The proposal was a fusion between the measurements acquired by
the force sensors and the decisions done by the accelerometer, providing accuracy, precision and efficiency.
The pressure sensors (load cells) measure the load forces exerted on the floor implemented
under the tiles allow to determine the posture of the monitored elder, standing, walking, sitting, falling,
etc. and the developed algorithm aligned with the accelerometer signals determines if the elder has fallen
and may trigger a quick assistance. The results presented showed the flowchart of the fusion between
accelerometers and force sensors to be able to locate and track the elders, recognize their activities and
detect fall cases.
Another approach, on older people remote health monitoring, was presented by Li et al. (2018) with
the objective to study assisted living on two types of sensing technologies: wearable (accelerometers,
gyroscope, and magnetometer) and radar sensors, using information fusion to enhance activity classification
accuracy, vector machines and nearest neighbor support, to automatically monitor the elderly
activity and fall detection. The feature fusion level implementation is described with the concatenated
data extraction from the sensors before introducing it into the classifiers, improving, therefore, substantially
the accuracy. The conclusions indicated that the classification performance was improved from
78-85% with individual sensors to 98% using multi-sensory approach and the proposed classification
fusion method.
Inertial sensors to detect fall risk were used for the assessment and prediction in older adults in a study
performed by Montesinos et al (2018). The goal was to present a systematic review and meta-analysis
in the sensor location relevance, the sensor task and their features, applying a statistical approach to
identify their optimal combinations. Results show a high and significant interaction between sensor’s
placement, task and feature categories to access the risk of falling. The framework developed for future
study, highlights dependences among those factors and the review demonstrated the optimal features
from inertial sensors for fall risk assessment in older adults.
Singh et al. (2020) presented a review on sensor technologies for fall detection systems that aimed to
provide a comprehensive technical insight in the previously done fall detection systems works, classifying
the distinct approaches and the challenges encountered. The authors also had the goal to extend their
study to provide an overview of each sensor technology such as accelerators, pressure sensors and radar
camera-based and their fusion in a complete fall detection system, showing their strengths and limitations
in terms of feature extraction, classification, performance and experimental datasets. The conclusions
presented by the authors were the characterization of sensor technologies into acoustic, floor pressure,
image, PIR, near field imaging, radar, ultrasonic, smartphone-based and wearable sensors-based systems
and summarized the strengths and weaknesses of each technology to help researchers in the selection of
the sensor technology for distinct applications.
McManus et al. (2022) developed a data-driven metrics for balance impairment and fall risk assessment
in older adult’s study using inertial sensors technology. Two studies were carried out by the authors, one
241
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
with an inertial-based balance sensor assessment and the other to report a reliability analysis of inertial
sensor postural stability measures and validation, comparing them with clinical scales. The authors also
elaborated a fall estimation algorithm based on inertial sensors captured data and a method to improve
the fall risk estimate, incorporating standard clinical fall risk data. The authors conclude that their study
demonstrates the reliability of the balance and fall risk measures acquired and their validation in a large
older adult group compared with the clinical scales. The results show from the fall risk classifier models
suggest they are more accurate at estimating fall risk status then a model based on Berg Balance Scale
or Time Up and Go test model, concluding that the algorithms used in the authors study are potentially
useful screening tools for balance impairments and falls risk.
FRAMEWORK MODEL
As presented on the related work, many are the advances done using sensors and elderly health care,
specially on fall detection, targeting physical medical parameters, triggering alert systems to care takers
or family. Jiang (2022) addressed the connection between smart sensors and the China Government health
management services to provide information and improve health care and better daily life to older people.
This preliminary study intends to go further than that, integrating directly into the patients record
the data retrieved from the sensors whatever they are, so the system must be agnostic to what features,
characteristics or data sensors acquire. The objective is to integrate on a SAaaS cloud environment any
type of sensors (Things) and deploy the data directly to the Portuguese National Health System to be,
in a short period of time, available for medical analysis or intervention.
In Portugal all Portuguese people have a unique health process number, the Personal Patient Data
Register, (PPDR) and a family process (FP) in each Health Center the family belongs to, so these two
registers may be used to integrate the information gathered from sensors throughout the SAaaS cloud
system into the Portuguese National Health System (PNHS) patient records.
As mentioned before the Se-aaS or SAaaS model, sensor providers register their Things into the cloud
for consumers to be able to retrieve data from those sensors, after the cloud infrastructure dynamically
provide virtual sensors corresponding as near as possible to what was requested.
In this study the usage of the SAaaS framework must be altered for the system to provide dynamically
the sensors, and attach the data retrieved from the sensors attributed to a specific elder, integrate
into his specific health care registration process, changing therefore slightly the usage of the known
architecture (Figure 4). Does this mean that the SAaaS model will not respond to health care sensors to
integrate data into the National Health Record? Absolutely not, for this to become a possible, there are
some changes to be implemented in the usage of the SAaaS Cloud Infrastructure and new layers must
be added into the PNHS patient records.
242
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
The first change is that the sensor owners are the same as the data consumers, meaning that the National
Health System will register the sensors into the cloud and retrieve their data, consuming all advantages
this model have in processing, storing and effectiveness, responding to their needs in acquiring sensor
data from elder patients without any initial investment on cloud infrastructures. There is no limitation
regarding that a data consumer cannot be also a sensor provider, so that is a non-issue.
Another change here is to authenticate each sensor with his specific characteristics, functionalities
and properties, adding the elder’s national health process number, for the cloud to be able to respond
and integrate on the PPDR. To respond to this need, another parameter may be inserted on the request,
which is the type of sensor, their functionalities, and the process number of the national health system
as a property needed for that sensor. Will this de-virtualize what the SAaaS model does, which is to create
virtual sensors closer as possible according to the request needs? Absolutely not, the SAaaS model
permits sensor owners to register their Things, and when they register, they must provide the sensor’s
functionality and their properties (ex. Functionality: Surveillance video camera, Properties: 40mpx,
motion detection, etc.). Once on the registration, one of the properties must be the elder’s health process
number, so that when a request is made to address directly to that elder’s sensor data, will bind to the
sensor with the same property.
If that is guaranteed, the SAaaS model will respond creating the virtual sensors with the functionalities
and properties inserted and there will be only the sensors directly related to the elders available,
the one’s previously registered with that same exact property, so that is also a non-issue.
What if the elders have a set of sensors all with the same functionalities and properties? As an example,
force sensors scattered around the house to determine if a fall occurs. The SAaaS model responds to that
problem again directly without any change. The system will create virtual sensors grouping in a cluster
the physical sensors with the same functionalities and properties and will respond to the consumer’s
request. Another way to guarantee the data access to the group of sensors is to discriminate distinct
properties in each sensor and in each request, but there is no need for that. So, this is also a non-issue.
And if there is on the elder’s home more than one elder and uses the same sensors? Here is the only
problem that has no answer with the SAaaS model framework, the sensors will not differentiate which
elder falls into the same home, it just knows it was a fall. In those cases, if there is more than one elder
using the same sensors then the property inserted on the registration and request will have to be the
Figure 4. New SAaaS Architecture Usage
243
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
FP and not the PPDR. In both cases, and depending on what sensor data will be retrieved, the alarms
must be on the PPDR side, due to the distinct physiology each patient or elder have and what are the
parameters range, that will trigger an alarm for the clinical staff to initiate the help protocol defined.
This will be also a non-issue.
The flow will be as follows:
1. When the PNHS installs sensors to detect, determine elder’s health parameters, daily routines,
fall detection or any other Things intended for data retrieval, they must be register into the SAasS
cloud infrastructure with the functionalities and properties of the sensor and adds a new property
the PPDR or the FP, depending on if is a sensor regards one single elder or a group of elders.
2. The SAaaS cloud will register on the database the sensors with the functionalities and properties
given.
3. On the consumer side the PNHS will request data specifying the same functionalities and properties
that were register on the sensor, including the PPDR or the FP number.
4. The SAaaS cloud will search for the physical sensors that may respond to the needs expressed by
the consumer side and will create virtual sensors with the same exact functionalities and properties
given on the request.
5. The PNHS will acquire the specific data of the patient or family to be integrated on their databases.
On the other hand, a new integration layer must be created on the PPDR side to interact with the
SAaaS system, retrieve the information and store it into the PPDR databases passing through an alarm
check environment (Figure 5).
The integration layer is responsible for requesting and acquiring the data from the SAaaS cloud infrastructure,
verify the information, and secure data and communications. Afterwards, the data follows
to a second layer that verifies the parameters on the patient data record database and determines if there
is an alarm to be triggered if the parameters read are outside the range of default parameters of that
specific patient or if it will register the acquired data onto the PPDR database.
Figure 5. Data Integration layers into the National Health Care System
244
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
CONCLUSION
This preliminary study addresses the possibility to integrate sensor data gathered from elder’s sensors
with the specifications of the SAaaS framework using the potential of the cloud infrastructures for storing
and processing capabilities and registering data into the patients records.
All features of the SAaaS were used to maintain possible the business model described on the paper,
without changes, using the specifications the model provides, allowing health care systems to determine
what sensors on elder’s homes or wearable sensors to respond to elders needs and gather and register
data into the health care databases.
This new framework design allows the registration of the sensors, the specific capabilities of a sensing
cloud infrastructure, may register the gathered data into the Portuguese Nacional Health Patient Record,
for all clinical and technical health staff to follow the elder’s daily living and provide better care.
The limitation of this work depends entirely on the Portuguese National Health Patient Record connection
with the framework and with the SAaaS infrastructure. Technologically everything is doable but
depends entirely on if the National Health Authorities will allow the connection to the patients records.
For future research, the author pretends to implement the framework connected to the Portuguese
National Health Patient Record, perform a study on an elderly care unit and register the sensors gathered
data for the clinical and technical health staff to access remotely and be able to provide better health
care to the elders.
REFERENCES
Casagrande F., Torresen J. & Evi Zouganeli (2018). Sensor Event Prediction using Recurrent Neural
Network in Smart Homes for Older Adults (pp 662-668). 2018 International Conference on Intelligent
Systems (IS). IEEE Access.
Choi, A., Kim, T., Yuhai, O., Jeong, S., Kim, K., Kim, H., & Mun, J. H. (2022). Deep Learning-Based
Near-Fall Detection Algorithm for Fall Risk Monitoring System Using a Single Inertial Measurement Unit
(pp 2385-2394). IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 30, doi:10.1109/
TNSRE.2022.3199068 PMID:35969550
Daher, M., Diab, A., Najjar, M., Khalil, M., & Charpillet, F. (2017). Elder Tracking and Fall Detection
System Using Smart Tiles. IEEE Sensors Journal, 17(2).
Distefano, S., Merlino, G., & Puliafito, A. (2012). Sensing and Actuation as a Service: A New Development
for Clouds (pp. 272-275). 2012 IEEE 11th International Symposium on Network Computing and
Applications. IEEE.
Fortino, G., Russo, W., Savaglio, C., Viroli, M., & Zhou, M. (2017). Modeling Opportunistic IoT Services
in Open IoT Ecosystems. In the 18th Workshop “From Objects to Agents,” Calabria, Italy.
Gaddam, A., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., & Grupta, G. S. (2010). Towards the Development of a Cognitive
Sensors Network-based Home for Elder Care (pp 484-491). 2010 Sixth International Conference on
Wireless and Mobile Communications. IEEE. 10.1109/ICWMC.2010.93
245
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
Gaddam, A., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., & Grupta, G. S. (2011). Elder Care Based on Cognitive Sensor
Network. IEEE Sensors Journal, 11(3).
Guerreiro J., Rodrigues L. & Correia N. (2019). Resource Allocation Model for Sensor Clouds under
the Sensing as a Service Paradigm (pp 1:18). Computers 8 MDPI AG.
Guerreiro, J., Rodrigues, L., & Correia, N. (2020). Allocation of Resources in SAaaS Clouds Managing
Thing Mashups (pp 99:1-1). IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management. IEEE.
Guinard, D., & Trifa, V. (2016). Building the Web of Things. Manning Publications.
Hajihashemi, Z., Yefimova, M., & Popescu, M. (2014). Detecting Daily Routines of Older Adults Using
Sensor Time Series Clustering (pp 5912-5915). 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE.
Hong, Y.-J., Kim, I.-J., Ahn, S. C., & Kim, H.-G. (2008). Activity Recognition using Wearable Sensors
for Elder Care (pp 302-305). 2008 Second International Conference on Future Generation Communication
and Networking. IEEE. 10.1109/FGCN.2008.165
Hsieh, C., Shi, W., Huang, H., Liu, K., Hsu, S. J., & Chan, C. (2018). Machine Learning-based Fall
Characteristics Monitoring System for Strategic Plan of Falls Prevention (pp 818-821). 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Applied System Innovation 2018. IEEE.
Hsu, Y. C., Lin, C. H., & Chen, W. T. (2014). Design of a Sensing Service Architecture for Internet of
Things with Semantic Sensor Selection. In International Conference UTC-ATC-ScalCom, Bali, Indonesia.
10.1109/UIC-ATC-ScalCom.2014.85
Jiang, Y. (2022). Construction of an Intelligent System for Elderly’s Health and Elderly Care from the
Perspective of the Integration of Smart Sensors and Physical Medicine (pp 541-544). Proceedings of
the Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT-2022), IEEE.
10.1109/ICSSIT53264.2022.9716434
Kim M., Asthana M., Bhargava, S., Iyyer K. K., Tangadpalliwar R. & Gao, J. (2016). Developing an
On-Demand Cloud-Based Sensing-as-a-Service System for Internet of Things. Journal of Computer
Networks and Communications.
Koçak, S., Artug, T., & Tulum, G. (2018). A Preliminar Study for Remote Healthcare System: Activity
Classification for Elder People with on Body Sensors. 2018 6th International Conference on Control
Engineering & Information Technology (CEIT), Istanbul, Turkey.
Lai, C. F., Chao, H. C., Lai, Y. X., & Wan, J. (2013). Cloud-Assisted Real-time Transrating for HTTP
Live Streaming (pp 61-70). IEEE Wireless Communications, 20.
Lai, C. F., Wang, H. C., Chao, H. C., & Han, G. (2013). A Network and Device Aware QoS Approach for
Cloud-Based Mobile Streaming. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia. doi:10.1109/TMM.2013.2240270
Li H., Shrestha A., Heidari H., Kernec J. & Fioranelli F. (2018). A Multisensory Approach for Remote
Health Monitoring of Older People. IEEE Journal of Electromagnetics, RF, Microwaves in Medicine
and Biology, 2(2).
246
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
Mcmanus, K., Greene, B., Ader, L., & Caulfield, B. (2022). Development of a Data-Driven Metrics for
Balance Impairment and Fall Risk Assessment in Older Adults (pp 2324-2332). IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, 69(7). IEEE.
Misra, S., Bera, S., Mondal, A., Tirkey, R., Chao, H. C., & Chattopadhyay, S. (2014). Optimal gateway
selection in sensor-cloud framework for health monitoring (pp 61-68). IET Wireless Sensor Systems, 4,
2. doi:10.1049/iet-wss.2013.0073
Montesinos, L., Castaldo, R., & Pecchia, L. (2018). Wearable Inertial Sensors for Fall Risk Assessment
and Prediction in Older Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis (pp 573-582). IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engenheering, 26(3). IEEE.
Perera C., Zaslavsky A., Christen P. & Georgakopoulos D. (2014). Sensing as a Service Model for Smart
Cities supported by Internet of Things. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies.
John Wiley and Sons.
Petrolo, R., Loscri, V., & Mitton, N. (2017). Towards a smart city based on cloud of things, a survey
on the smart city vision and paradigms (28, e2931). Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications
Technologies. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Pordata. (2022). Portuguese aging index statistics. Pordata. https://www.pordata.pt/portugal/indice+de
+envelhecimento+e+outros+indicadores+de+envelhecimento-526
Sheng, X., Tang, J., & Xue, G. (2013). Sensing as a Service: Challenges, Solutions and Future Directions
(pp 3733-3739). IEEE Sensors Journal, 13, 10. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2013.2262677
Singh, A., Rehman, S., Yongchareon, S., & Chong, P. (2020). Sensor Technologies for Fall Detection
Systems: A Review. IEEE Sensors Journal, 20(13).
Sumi, L., Longchar, I., & Dey, S. (2019). IoT-based Fall Prevention and Detection for Senior Citizens,
Phisically and Intellectually Disabled (pp 190-195). 2019 International Conference on Information
Technology (ICIT). IEEE. 10.1109/ICIT48102.2019.00040
Taramasco, C., Rodenas, T., Martinez, F., Fuentes, P., Munoz, R., Olivares, R., Albuquerque, V., & Demongeot,
J. (2018). A Novel Monitoring System for Fall Detection in Older People (pp 43563-43574).
IEEE Access: Practical Innovations, Open Solutions, 6, doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2861331
Wang, D., Shen, J., Mei, L., Qian, S., Li, J., & Hao, Z. (2017). Performance Investigation of a Weareable
Distributed-Deflection Sensor in Arterial Pulse Waveform Measurement. IEEE Sensor Journal, 17(13).
Wang, S., & Zhang, X. (2015). An Approach for Fall Detection of Older Population Based on Multisensor
Data Fusion (pp 320-323). The 12th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots and Ambient
Intelligente (URAI 2015), Goyang City, Korea.
Wang, W., Wang, Q., & Sohraby, K. (2017). Multimedia Sensing as a Service (MSaaS): Exploring Resource
Saving Potentials of a Cloud-Edge IoT and Fogs (pp 487-495). IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4, 2.
Wang, Y., Cang, S., & Yu, H. (2017). A noncontact-sensor surveillance system towards assisting independent
living for older people. Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Automation &
Computing, University of Huddersfield, UK. 10.23919/IConAC.2017.8082002
247
Sensing and Actuation as a Service for Health Data Integration
﻿
Wang, Y., Cang, S., & Yu, H. (2018). A Data Fusion-Based Hybrid Sensory System for Older People’s
Daily Activity and Daily Routine Recognition. IEEE Sensors Journal, 18(16).
Xu, G., Li, J., Wang, L., Wu, J., Luo, K., Yue, Y., & Ran, F. (2013). Hardware Design of a Body Sensor
Network System used for Elder Care (pp 1585-1589). 2013 Ninth International Conference on Natural
Computation (ICNC). IEEE. 10.1109/ICNC.2013.6818234
Xu, Y., & Mao, S. (2013). A Survey of Mobile Cloud Computing for Rich Media Applications (pp 46-
53). IEEE Wireless Communications, 20.
Section 4
Elderly care differences and protection policies through the promotion of outpatient care, health education,
fundamental protection and promotion of the rights of the elderly, and the safeguarding of human
dignity are explored.
Elderly Care Differences and
Protection Policies
249
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 15
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch015
ABSTRACT
Aging is a challenge for the whole of society and for all generations, involving issues related to intergenerational
solidarity, but also to adapting to their new needs. The WHO has established guidelines
for the care of the elderly. However, the realities and cultures of countries influence the provided care.
It was in this sense that this chapter addresses: characterize the elderly care in Portugal and in North
Macedonia; describe the elderly care contexts existing in Portugal and in North Macedonia; and reflect
about the similarities and differences about elderly care in Portugal and in North Macedonia. Despite
the different realities, cultures, and policies of the two countries under study, the authors found that the
elderly are cared for in different and distinct contexts, and there is a shortage of structural and human
resources.
INTRODUCTION
People aged 60 years and older are increasing in number and proportion. In 2019, the WHO (2022d) estimated
people aged 60 years old and older were one billion. By 2030 it is expected that 1.4 billion people
will be in this age group and by 2050 the number will reach 2.1 billion. Although this is a phenomenon
that may be happening in different varieties and at different speeds, it is almost universal. They reflect
Elderly Care in Portugal
and North Macedonia:
Different Cultures, Same Goal
Carla Piscarreta Damásio
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5507-112X
Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology, School of Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria,
Portugal
Gordana Ristevska Dimitrovska
Higher Medical School, University St. Kliment Ohridski Bitola, North Macedonia
250
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
successes in health care and in social policy, but also this is due to a decline in the fertility rate and an
increase in life expectancy, resulting in fewer births and more people living longer (Greer et al., 2021).
There is a need for societies to adapt to this changing demographic and invest in healthy aging (WHO,
2022d). To be an older adult differs considerably both across countries and within countries. Health
inequalities among older populations are the cumulative product of particular trajectories within social
contexts that create social and economic advantages and disadvantages (Greer et al., 2021).
The 2015 World Health Organization (WHO) report on aging and health defines the goal of Healthy
Aging as helping people in “developing and maintaining the functional ability that enables well-being”.
A longer life is an incredibly valuable resource. It provides an opportunity to rethink not only what aging
can be, but how all our lives can unfold. However, the extent of the opportunities that arise from increased
longevity will depend greatly on one key factor: health. Most health problems faced by older people are
associated with chronic conditions, mainly non-communicable diseases. Many of these conditions can
be prevented or managed through healthy behaviors and early detection. Other health problems can be
effectively controlled, especially if they are detected early enough. And even for people with decline
in capacity, supportive environments can ensure that they live dignified lives with continued personal
growth. The public spending on health systems, long-term care, and broader enabling environments are
often portrayed as costs. However, as advocated by WHO (2015), these expenditures are considered as
investments that enable the capacity and therefore the well-being of older people. These investments
also help societies meet their obligations related to the fundamental rights of older people (WHO, 2015).
With different locations, customs, and habits, Portugal and North Macedonia are looking to provide
care for their elderly. Society is becoming increasingly diverse in terms of behaviors, norms, beliefs, and
values. Each culture, shaped by its environment and social structure, has its own perception of health,
disease, and care (Lages, 2012/2013). It is in this sense, the importance to truly know the socio-cultural
characteristics of the countries, to be able to better understand the provided care in each country.
All countries, including Portugal and North Macedonia, need to ensure that their health and social
systems are ready to make the most out of the demographic shift (WHO, 2022b, 2022c). Based on these
reflections, the following questions emerged:
• Which contexts of elderly care exist in Portugal and in North Macedonia?
• What is the distribution of elderly care in Portugal and in North Macedonia?
• What advancements have been made in recent years to enhance the national systems of elderly
care in both Portugal and North Macedonia?
In order to answer these questions, we opted for a narrative literature review.
This chapter aims to:
• Characterize the elderly care in Portugal and in North Macedonia;
• Describe the existing elderly care contexts in Portugal and in North Macedonia;
• Reflect about the similarities and differences of elderly care in Portugal and in North Macedonia.
251
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
PORTUGAL AND NORTH MACEDONIA:
CHARACTERISTICS, CUSTOMS AND USES
Culture involves specific elements like ethnic, racial, religious, geographic, or social groups, which include
personal identification, language, thoughts, communications, actions, customs, beliefs, values and
institutions (National Institutes of Health, 2021). Assistance systems are an integral part of the overall
cultural system. In every culture there are systems of assistance, formalized to varying degrees, whose
nature is rooted in the symbolic heritage of the society (Abreu, 2003). Cultural factors influence beliefs
about health, disease, healing, wellness and delivery of health services (National Institutes of Health,
2021). Further we address, in relation to Portugal and North Macedonia:
• Location and history;
• Traditions;
• Demography and family structure and
• Relevant health indicators in aging and health care.
Location and Some History
Portugal is a country located in Southern Europe (Figure 1), covering a total area of 92,212 km2. It
consists of a mainland region and two autonomous regions: the archipelagos of Madeira and the Azores,
located in the Atlantic Ocean (República Portuguesa, Negócios Estrangeiros, 2022).
Although King Afonso Henriques was recognized as the king by León and Castile in 1143, Portugal’s
recognition as an independent kingdom dates back to 1179 with the release of the bull Manifestis Probatum.
Portugal, along with other Iberian Christian kingdoms, emerged during the regain period when
Christians who resisted Islamic conquest began to reconquer lands they had lost decades or centuries
earlier. Portugal completed its Reconquista in 1249-1250 by occupying the last Islamic villages in the
Algarve. After some battles for independence, peace was signed in 1668, and Portugal was internationally
recognized as an independent kingdom of the Hispanic Monarchy. Portugal was a country of navigators
who marked history, with colonies in Africa. In 1910, the Monarchy was replaced by the Implantation
of the Republic. After political instability, Portugal experienced 48 years of dictatorship, which ended
with the Revolution of 1974, with no fatalities. The Constitution of 1976 consolidated the country as
a pluralistic and free republic, guaranteeing individual liberties and free elections. Portugal joined the
European Economic Community, side by side with Spain, in 1986. Portugal’s withdrawal from NATO in
1949 came about due to pressure from the United States and Great Britain for a democratization process
that lasted until the expansion of Soviet communism, the priority being to maintain the fascist regimes
in the Iberian Peninsula (Ferreira & Dias, 2016).
The majority of the Portuguese people are Catholic, but the Portuguese Constitution guarantees religious
freedom, allowing for the presence of several other religions in Portugal (Turismo de Portugal, 2022b).
North Macedonia is a landlocked country situated in the center of the Balkan peninsula (Figure
1), occupying an area of 25,713 km2. The Republic gained its independence from Yugoslavia in 1991.
The history of the region is very rich, its importance lies not in numbers or resources, but in the trade
routes and communication between continents, regions and cities. Most of the Balkan peninsula was
part of the Ottoman Empire, with the territory of today’s North Macedonia being 5 centuries under Ottoman
rule, which brought diversity of ethnic groups, cultures and religions. Ottoman control ended by
252
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
the Balkan wars (1912-13) after which the region of Macedonia was divided among Greece, Bulgaria,
and Serbia. Following World War I, the Serbian segment was incorporated into the Kingdom of Serbs,
Croats, and Slovenes (renamed Yugoslavia in 1929). After World War II the Serbian part of Macedonia
became a constituent republic within the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia (later Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia). The collapse of Yugoslavia led the Republic of Macedonia to declare
its independence on September 17, 1991. In the 30 years of independence the country witnessed the
Yugoslavia wars, Kosovo war and went through internal armed conflict in 2001. In February 2019, the
Prespa Agreement came into effect, which ended the dispute with Greece over the country’s name, and the
name North Macedonia was adopted. In the past 21 years North Macedonia regained stability, organized
a functional multiethnic society and went steadily on the path of Euro-Atlantic integration by becoming
EU candidate member in 2005 and NATO member in 2020. Connected with the EU integration process,
a political term Western Balkans has been coined, in the early 1990s, and since then the Republic of
North Macedonia is considered part of the group of six Balkan countries who remain outside the Union.
Figure 1. Map with location of Portugal and the Republic of North Macedonia
253
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Traditions
Due to its history, Portugal is a country rich in customs and traditions. From the north to the south of
the country there is a wide variety of music, food, and traditions. Some of them are among the Unesco
Heritage Sites, be they buildings, places or traditions. We highlight the Mediterranean Diet, which is
part of the identity card of Portuguese gastronomy. At its base we find vegetables, fruit, quality bread
and unrefined cereals, dry and fresh legumes (beans, chickpeas, broad beans, etc.), nuts and oilseeds
(walnuts, almonds, chestnuts, raisins, etc.), olive oil as the main source of fat and the consumption of
fish. Unesco considered it a true lifestyle, also highlighting the conviviality, celebration, and transmission
of knowledge around the table (Turismo de Portugal, 2022a).
The North Macedonia nature, culture and cuisine are exquisite. The culture of North Macedonia
is a blend of ancient and modern influences. The country has a rich history dating back to the ancient
Macedonian kingdom and the Byzantine and Ottoman empires. This history is reflected in the country’s
architecture, art, and traditional customs and festivals. Folk music and dance are an important part of the
culture, with influences from the Balkans and the Mediterranean. Religion also plays a significant role
in the culture, with the majority of the population being Christians (59.4%) predominantly Orthodox
Christians followed by Muslims (32.2%). North Macedonia has a rich religious heritage and is home
to many historic monasteries and mosques (UNESCO 2022). Additionally, the country is known for its
delicious cuisine, which combines traditional dishes with Mediterranean and Balkan flavors.
Demography and Family Structure
Portugal has a resident population of 10 344 802, as of 2021. In 2020, the Aging Index was 167.0 (INE,
2022). However, Portugal has become a country of migrations, with many Portuguese nationals returning
or repatriating and hundreds of thousands of foreigners coming to the country, adding diversity and
complexity to the national demography. The inflow of immigrants has helped to reinforce the country’s
younger age groups, including childbearing and working age groups, and to attenuate the aging of the
Portuguese population (Oliveira, 2021). Without immigration we would be fewer, poorer, and older
(Góis & Marques, 2018). Brazil, Cape Verde, Nepal, Guinea-Bissau, India, Angola, and Pakistan are
among the countries whose nationals have received the most residence visas in 2019 and 2020. However,
besides these countries, among the foreign nationalities living in Portugal, there are people from the
United Kingdom, Romania, Ukraine, Italy, China and France (Oliveira, 2021).
Portugal has stood out as one of the world’s oldest countries, and the relationship between aging and
immigration is an important issue. Research suggests that while immigration from outside the European
Union can mitigate demographic aging, immigration of EU citizens may exacerbate it. Since the year
2000, the number of elderly people in Portugal has surpassed the number of young people. The falling
birth rate, increase in average life expectancy, and rise of emigration (especially between 2011 and 2014),
with outflows of the fertile and working age population, have contributed to the effective decrease in the
country’s population and worsened Portuguese demographic aging (Oliveira, 2021). Projections by the
National Institute of Statistics (INE, 2019) indicate that the country’s resident population will decline
from the current 10.3 million to 7.9 million by 2080, with the number of residents falling below 10
million already in 2033 (Figure 2).
The demographic landscape of North Macedonia has been deeply affected by the various upheavals
the country has faced during its independent existence, as well as global trends. Census data from 2002
254
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
(SSORNM, 2002a) showed a total population of 2,022,547 inhabitants, while the newest 2021 census
results reveal a population of 1,836,713 (SSORNM, 2022f) - a clear indication of rapid population decline
(as shown in Figure 2).
The changes in the age structure of the Portuguese population, namely the decrease in the young
population and the increase in the elderly population, result in the ongoing demographic aging process,
with an increase in the median age of the resident population in Portugal from 44.0 to 45.8 years between
2015 and 2020. In percentage terms, in 2020, the resident population in Portugal was composed of 13.4%
young people, 64.1% working-age people, and 22.4% elderly people. The proportion of elderly people
in Portugal was higher than in the EU27, being the 4th country with the highest percentage of elderly
people, surpassed only by Greece, Finland and Italy. In 2020, the old-age dependency ratio increased to
35 per 100 people of working age. In the 2018-2020 triennium, life expectancy at birth for the population
residing in Portugal was estimated at 81.06 years, with a trend of increasing longevity. In the same
period, the average life expectancy at age 65 years for the total resident population in Portugal was
19.69 years (INE, 2021a). In 2019, the mortality rate per 100,000 inhabitants for individuals aged 30 to
70 years old attributed to circulatory system diseases, malignant tumors, diabetes mellitus, and chronic
respiratory diseases was 288.5 (INE, 2021b) (Figure 3).
Figure 2. Population Growth, Percent in Portugal and in North Macedonia
Source: theGlobalEconomy.com (2022)
255
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
The decrease of population in North Macedonia is partly due to the decreased birth rate, but also due
to massive emigration to more developed countries. Emigration from North Macedonia has been ongoing
since the 1960’s, dominated by economic emigration, which in some families is transgenerational. The
state lacks mechanisms to track the ‘old’ emigration nor their descendants (second and third generation).
The massive migrant wave in 2015, and the EU countries response, brought major changes in the
emigration from the Republic of North Macedonia. Officially the State Statistical Office counts only
2104 Macedonian citizens who emigrated in the period 2015-2019, dominantly younger people. More
realistic estimation of the Macedonian diaspora comes from United Nations and World Bank reports.
Namely Macedonian citizens who reside in other countries worldwide increased from 527,075 in 2010
to 693,900 in 2020 (UN, 2022). The preferred destination countries are Australia, USA, Germany, Italy
and Switzerland. The return flow so far is minimal.
Between 2015-2020, the European countries of reception experienced a gradual aging of their migrant
population from North Macedonia, but the number of individuals in the working age range (15-64
years) continued to increase. In 2020, one-third (31.9%) of migrants were younger than 29 years, while
the younger middle-aged population (30-39) constituted 27.1% and more than one-fifth (22.3%) were
older middle-aged (40-49 years). Out of the able-bodied population abroad, approximately 41,000 or
18.7% were over 50 years old, indicating an increasing number of Macedonian citizens abroad who will
acquire the right to a pension in the next decade. Due to the long duration of emigration, the number of
people over 65 years old is continuously increasing, from 12,059 in 2015 to 17,784 in 2020. During this
period, the aging contingent (85+) doubled from 245 to 484 people (GRNM, 2020).
In contrast, the resident population in North Macedonia over 65 years old is 315,331 inhabitants
or 17.2%, and the average age in 2021 is 40.8 years. These indicators show that North Macedonia is a
country with an older population (SSORNM, 2022c). The average life expectancy in North Macedonia
in the period 2019 to 2021 was 74.6 years, and the old-age dependency ratio was 45% of the workingage
population in 2021. With an aging population and an increasing aging segment of the Macedonian
diaspora, there will be a growing demand for elderly care services in the coming decades. The government
has started addressing this issue by increasing the number of available services for the elderly, but
their effectiveness is still being evaluated.
In terms of the percentage of the population over 65 years old, Portugal and North Macedonia show
similar trends (Figure 4) (theGlobalEconomy.com, 2022).
Figure 3. Age Pyramid of Portugal and North Macedonia according to Census 2021
Legend: Man on the left; Women on the right
Source: INE (2022); SSORNM (2022f)
256
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
North Macedonia experienced the biggest decline in the proportion of dependents in the working-age
population up until 2012, but this trend has since reversed and is now increasing (as shown in Figure 5).
Portugal, on the other hand, has the highest percentage in both of these indicators according to theGlobalEconomy.
com’s data from 2022 (theGlobalEconomy.com, 2022).
Figure 4. Population ages 65 and above, percent of total, in Portugal and in North Macedonia
Source: theGlobalEconomy.com (2022)
257
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
The family structure and customs in Portugal and North Macedonia have undergone significant
changes in recent decades.
In Portugal, the majority of the population resides near large urban centers, primarily along the
coast. However, over time, the gap between urban and rural areas has widened, with the trend towards
coastalization and population concentration near the capital becoming more pronounced in the last decade.
Roughly 20% of the country’s population lives in the seven most populated municipalities, which
only occupy 1.1% of the total territory. Conversely, the 208 least populated municipalities, which cover
65.8% of the country’s area, are home to approximately 20% of the population (INE, 2022). In North
Macedonia, the process of industrialization in urban centers and the lack of basic infrastructure in rural
areas began in the 1960s, attracting young people to migrate to urban areas. As a result, according to
the 2021 census, the population is predominantly concentrated in the capital city of Skopje and other
urban areas (62%), with many villages left empty (Radulovic, 2017).
The Portuguese family structure has changed, with smaller families and increasing diversity. More
people are having children outside of marriage, and there are now more single-parent and reconstituted
families, which account for 27.4% of all households. The trend towards smaller family sizes is evident
in the increasing number of one- and two-person households, and a decrease in three- and four-person
households. In 2021, one-person households made up 24.8% of all households, while four-person
households accounted for 14.7%, and households with five or more people accounted for 5.6%. Analy-
Figure 5. Dependent people as percent of the working age population, in Portugal and in North Macedonia
Source: theGlobalEconomy.com (2022)
258
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
sis of single-person households shows that they are typically older, retired, and less educated, with a
“significant growth” linked to demographic phenomena such as increased life expectancy. Half of these
households (50.3%) comprised people aged 65 or older, and while a significant portion of this population
was already retired (48.9%), a high percentage (40.6%) were still working. Women made up the
majority of these households (61.4%).
The average age at first marriage increased over time. From 26.9 years for men and 24.8 years for
women in 1960, it rose to 31.1 years for men and 29.5 years for women; the data for 2021 point to 34.3
years for men and 32.9 years for women. The average age at birth of the first child has been steadily
increasing, from 23.5 years in the 1980s to 29.2 years in 2011 and 30.9 years in 2021. The fertility rate
has also been falling, reaching record lows by 2021. From over 90% in the sixties of the 20th century,
in 2011 it reached 38.6%, and in 2021 it was 35.8% (INE, 2022). The average number of children, for
women and men, went from 1.03 in 2013 to 0.86 in 2019 (Table 1).
Changes in the family structure and functioning followed North Macedonia’s urbanization. The
Macedonian family was dominantly patriarchal, the family unit used to be extended to 3 or even 4
generations living together in a household, where the oldest male member had the highest authority in
the family’s decision-making process (Radulovic, 2017). Although the Macedonian family still holds
some patriarchal features, the emancipation of women, their significant contribution to the workforce
and integration in the educational and political process led to many beneficial effects on the society.
Women stay longer in the education process, enter into marriage later on (27 years in 2021 compared
to 23 in 1994) (SSORNM, 2022d), give birth to their first child at a later age (around 28 years in 2021
compared to 23 in 1994) (SSORNM, 2022e), have fewer children than before. The household shrank
from average members of 5.02 in 1961; 3.85 members in 1994, 3.6 members in 2002 to 3.06 members
in 2021. The total fertility rate is 1.46 children on average for a woman in the fertile period (15-49 years
old) (SSORNM, 2022c) (Table 1).
Both in Portugal and in North Macedonia, the shifts in society have not only impacted family dynamics,
but also significantly affected the need for external elderly care and the methods of providing it.
Table 1. Some Population Indicators, in Portugal and in North Macedonia, according to Census 2021
Country
Population Indicator Portugal North Macedonia
Rural/Urban Population Urban Urban
Average age of women at first
marriage 29,5 years old 27 years old
Average age at which women
have their first child 30,9 years old 28 years old
Average number of children 0,86 1,46
Source: Elaborated by the Authors
259
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Relevant Health Indicators in Aging
Peel, McClure & Bartlett (2005) identified behavioral determinants of healthy aging, such as: smoking
status, physical activity level, body mass index, diet, alcohol use, and health practices.
The latest National Health Survey conducted in Portugal in 2019 reveals that 17.0% of the population
living in Portugal aged 15 or older were tobacco smokers (including heated tobacco); 1.3 million
people (14.2%) smoked daily and 248,000 (2.8%) did so occasionally. Males recorded a prevalence of
smoking of 23.9%, females of 10.9%. The prevalence of daily consumption was 14.2%; 20.2% in men
and 9.0% in women. There has been a reduction in tobacco consumption in all regions of the country
(Portugal, Ministry of Health, General Direction of Health, 2020). With regard to alcohol consumption,
in 2016/17, 2.8% of the population aged 15-74 years old residing in Portugal had high risk/harmful
alcohol consumption and 0.8% had dependence symptoms. High-risk consumption or dependence are
very close in the age groups from 35 years and older, with those aged 35-44 and 45-54 having the highest
rates of high risk use, and those aged 55-64 and 65 years and those aged 55-64 and 65-74 years having
the highest prevalence of dependence (SICAD, 2018). However, according to the OECD (2021), the
Portuguese consume an average of 12 liters of alcohol annually, one of the highest records. Excessive
alcohol consumption will impact health and average life expectancy.
In Portugal the prevalence of hypertension in the population aged 15 years or older is 33% (Gião, Pereira
& Castelo Branco, 2020). In 2018 the estimated prevalence of Diabetes in the Portuguese population aged
between 20 and 79 years old (7.7 million individuals) was 13.6%, that is, more than 1 million Portuguese
in this age group have Diabetes. The impact of aging of the Portuguese population (20-79 years) was
reflected in an increase of 1.9 percentage points (p.p.) in the prevalence rate of Diabetes between 2009
and 2018, which corresponds to an increase of around 16.3% in the last 10 years (Sociedade Portuguesa
de Diabetologia, 2019). Mortality in 2020 was mostly attributed to circulatory system diseases (28%),
malignant tumors (23%), respiratory system diseases (9.1%), COVID-19 (5.8%) and digestive system
diseases (4.2%) (Pordata, 2023). According to data from the World Health Organization (2022e), the
prevalence of obesity in Portugal, as in many countries around the world, has been steadily increasing
in recent years. In 2016, the prevalence of obesity in adults was estimated to be around 21%, with the
proportion of overweight adults being around 57,5%. This may have been aggravated by the restrictions
imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic that may have led to inadequate eating habits and physical activity
patterns. (WHO, 2022e). For the General Direction of Health (DGS, 2023), in Portugal, the main
factors associated with obesity are: poor quality/unhealthy diet; increased sedentary lifestyle and lack
of physical activity; lack of sleep or not having a restful sleep.
Referring to some health indicators of the elderly population, it is unfortunate that the official
healthcare statistic is quite poor in North Macedonia. According to World Bank in North Macedonia
35% of adults are smokers, 27% are heavy drinkers, 32% (2015) of the population age 18 and older has
hypertension and 9% (2019) of the population ages 20-79 has type 1 or type 2 diabetes (World Bank,
2020), that negatively affects the process of healthy aging. The mortality in 2021 was mostly attributed
to circulatory diseases making up 35.9% of the total number of deaths, followed by deaths due to the
COVID-19 with 20.6%, neoplasms with 13.8%, while 5.8% were deaths due to endocrine, nutritional
and metabolic diseases (SSORNM, 2022c). Obesity is a growing health concern in the Republic of
North Macedonia, as it is in many countries around the world. According to data from the World Health
Organization, the prevalence of obesity in North Macedonia has been steadily increasing in recent years.
In 2016, the prevalence of obesity in adults was estimated to be around 22.4%, with the proportion of
260
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
overweight adults being around 58.1% (WHO, 2022e). There are several factors that contribute to the
high rates of obesity in North Macedonia, including a diet high in processed foods and a lack of physical
activity. The transition to a market economy in the 1990s led to increased availability of processed
and fast food, which, with their high sugar content, contributed to the rise in obesity rates and related
health complications.
Some of these health indicators are presented in a comparative table for the two countries under
analysis (Table 2).
Health Care
Portugal has a healthcare system with high quality. It’s considered the 9th in Europe and the 12th best
in the world, in terms of overall efficiency. The Portuguese health system is defined by three related
systems. The NHS is universal, comprehensive and nearly free at the point of use, supported mainly
through taxation. Regardless of socioeconomic status, all residents can benefit equally from care. There
are also health subsystems, which can be public or private covered by health insurance schemes. To speed
up access to elective hospital treatment and ambulatory treatment, and to choose the provider there is
the possibility of Voluntary Health Insurance. At the central level, the Ministry of Health takes care of
planning and regulation, while the management of the NHS occurs at the regional level, through five
regional health administrations, whose autonomy over budget setting and spending is limited to primary
care (WHO et al., 2017) (Table 3).
The healthcare system of North Macedonia operates on a combination of public and private financing
and delivery. The government provides funding for healthcare through general tax collection and
healthcare insurance contributions, while healthcare services are delivered by both public and private
providers. The public healthcare system includes hospitals, primary care clinics, and specialized clin-
Table 2. Some Health Indicators, in Portugal and in North Macedonia
Country
Health Indicator Portugal North Macedonia
Smokers 17% (2019) 35% (2015)
High risk/harmful alcohol
consumption 2,8% (2016/17) 27% (2015)
Arterial Hypertension 33% (2020) 32% (2019)
Diabetes 13, 6% (2019) 9% (2019)
Mortality Causes
(2020)
Circulatory Diseases - 28%
Malignant tumors - 23%
Respiratory system diseases - 9.1%
COVID-19 (5.8%)
Digestive system diseases - 4.2%
(2021)
Circulatory Diseases - 35.9%
COVID-19 - 20.6%
Neoplasms - 13.8%
Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
- 5.8%
Obesity
(2016)
Adults - 21%
Proportion of overweight adults - 57,5%
(2016)
Adults - 22,4%
Proportion of overweight adults - 58,1%
Source: Elaborated by the Authors
261
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
ics, while the private sector includes private hospitals and clinics, as well as a range of out-of-pocket
services. However, the country faces various challenges in terms of healthcare, including insufficient
financial resources and a shortage of healthcare professionals, particularly in rural areas. Furthermore,
the healthcare system is struggling to meet the increasing demands of an aging population and changing
health needs. Nevertheless, the government is striving to enhance the healthcare system and increase
access to healthcare for all citizens, with a focus on improving primary care, increasing the number of
healthcare professionals, and modernizing healthcare infrastructure.
The public spending on healthcare as a percentage of total health expenditure in Portugal is 65%,
while in North Macedonia it is 61.2%. There is a significant discrepancy in the number of available
healthcare workers between the two countries. This highlights the challenges that North Macedonia
faces in terms of providing adequate healthcare to its population, particularly in terms of workforce
availability (WHO, 2022a) (Table 3).
ELDERLY CARE
The extent of the opportunities arising from increased longevity depends very much on one key factor:
health. The loss of abilities commonly associated with aging is in fact only loosely related to people’s
chronological age. There isn’t a ‘typical’ older person. The diversity of capabilities and health needs of
older adults is not random, but rather stems from events that occur throughout the life course and are
often changeable, underscoring the importance of the life-course approach to understanding the aging
process. Although most older adults experience multiple health problems over time, advanced age does
not imply dependence. Moreover, contrary to popular belief, aging has much less influence on health
care spending than other factors, including the high costs of new medical technologies (WHO, 2015).
However, the elderly are a forgotten and neglected group. In Central and Eastern Europe the model of
the forgotten elderly predominates, where healthy fiscal balances reign over the safety of the elderly.
Older people are one of the groups most dependent on effective health and social care services. When
these services break down, the elderly will suffer, that means that some of the most vulnerable - that is,
the oldest old - have indeed been left exposed (Greer et al., 2021).
The consideration of health and disability is crucial when discussing aging. If old age is associated
with prolonged illness, disability and dependence, it has significant economic, social and health costs.
The more educated the elderly people are, they have better odds for healthy aging. Communities where
people spend more years in poor health experience more negative health effects. (Ibid, 2021). Healthy
Table 3. Some Health Care Indicators, in Portugal and in North Macedonia
Country
Health Care Indicator Portugal North Macedonia
Health Expenditure 65% 61.2%
Physicians per 100,000
inhabitants 443 280
Nurses/midwives per 100,000
inhabitants 638 421
Source: Elaborated by the Authors
262
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
aging encompasses more than just the absence of disease, as the maintenance of functional ability is
paramount for the elderly. It is important that health systems replace disease-centered curative models
and invest in integrated care focused on the needs of older adults (WHO, 2015)
The WHO (2015) defines healthy aging as the process of developing and maintaining functional
capacity
that allows well-being in old age. The goal of interventions to promote healthy aging is to maximize
functional capacity1. This can be achieved by building and maintaining intrinsic capacity 2, which allows
someone with decreased functional capacity to do things that are important to them. With distinct modes
of intervention in each country, there are four priority areas of action to achieve this goal:
1) Align health systems for the older populations they serve;
2) Develop long-term care systems;
3) Create supportive environments for older adults;
4) Improve measurement, monitoring, and understanding.
For each priority intervention area, WHO defines Key Approaches, which are presented in Table 4.
In 2018, the WHO made some recommendations to answer the professionals’ needs in developing
comprehensive community based approaches and evidence-based, to introduce interventions at the primary
health care to prevent declines in capacity. Due to the aging process and the person becoming frail
Table 4. WHO Guidelines for Healthy Aging
HEALTHY AGING
Goal: Maximize functional capacity
Priority Areas of Action Key Approaches
1) Align health systems for the
older populations they serve
a) Develop and ensure access to services that provide comprehensive centered and holistic care for
older adults.
b) Orienting systems around intrinsic capabilities.
c) Ensuring a sustainable and appropriately trained health care workforce.
2) Develop long-term care
systems
a) Laying the foundation for a long-term care system.
b) Build and maintain a sustainable and properly trained workforce.
c) Ensuring the quality of long-term care.
3) Create supportive environments
for older adults
a) Combat age discrimination
b) Enable autonomy.
c) Supporting Healthy Aging in all policies and at all levels of government.
4) Improve measurement,
monitoring, and understanding
a) Agreement on policies, measures and analytical approaches for Healthy Aging.
b) Improve the understanding of the health status and needs of larger populations and how well their
needs are being met.
c) To increase understanding of the trajectories of Healthy Aging and what can be done to improve
them.
Based on WHO (2015)
263
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
or care dependent, it is essential to intervene at an early stage. These Guidelines and the supplementary
implementation guide were organized into three modules, interrelated, that aim to deliver synergistic
effects on functional and intrinsic capacities:
• Module I: Declines in intrinsic capacity, including mobility loss, malnutrition, visual impairment
and hearing loss, cognitive impairment, and depressive symptoms (Table 5);
• Module II: Geriatric syndromes associated with care dependency, including urinary incontinence
and risk of falls (Table 6);
• Module III: Caregiver3 support: interventions to support caregiving and prevent caregiving
strain (Table 7) (WHO, 2017: vii).
Like any recommendation, its implementation is supposed to be person-centered and with an integrated
approach.
Table 5. WHO Module I Guidelines
Module I: Declining Physical and Mental Capacities
Mobility Loss
Recommendation 1:
Multimodal exercise should be recommended for older people with declining physical capacity, measured by gait
speed, grip strength and other physical performance measures.
Malnutrition Recommendation 2:
Oral supplemental nutrition with dietary advice should be recommended for older people affected by undernutrition.
Visual
Impairment
Recommendation 3:
Older people should receive routine screening for visual impairment in the primary care setting, and timely provision
of comprehensive eye care.
Hearing loss
Recommendation 4:
Screening followed by provision of hearing aids should be offered to older people for timely and identification and
management of hearing loss.
Cognitive
Impairment
Recommendation 5:
Cognitive stimulation can be offered to older people with cognitive impairment, with or without a formal diagnosis
of dementia.
Depressive
Symptoms
Recommendation 6:
Older adults who are experiencing depressive symptoms can be offered brief, structured psychological interventions,
in accordance with WHO mhGAP intervention guidelines, delivered by health care professionals with a good
understanding of mental health care for older adults.
Adapted from WHO (2017: ix)
264
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
The European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies initiated a study series on the Economics
of Healthy and Active Aging and concluded that population aging will not turn a major driver of health
spending trends, and that even though there will be labor market changes related to population aging,
older people continue productive (whether they are paid or unpaid) (Greer et al., 2021).
ELDERLY CARE IN PORTUGAL
In Portugal, elderly rights are not protected by a specific legal diploma. It is enshrined in the Constitution
of the Portuguese Republic (1976), in the Civil Code (1966) (Decree-Law Nr 47344, 25/11), in the Legal
Regime of the Accompanied Major (2018) (Law no. 49/2018, of August 14) and in a document from the
Portuguese Association for Victim Support (APAV, 2020) (Older Portugal. For a Society where rights
have no age). Extremely relevant strategies and reforms have been developed by the Social Security and
Health Ministries with regard to social responses for the Elderly. Following Decision No. 940/2011/EU
of the European Parliament and the Council, of September 14, 2011, through Order No. 12427/2016,
of 17/10, the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, Finance, Labour, Solidarity and Social Security,
Table 6. WHO Module II Guidelines
Module II: Geriatric Syndromes
Urinary
Incontinence
Recommendation 7:
Prompted voiding for the management of urinary incontinence can be offered for older people with cognitive
impairment.
Recommendation 8:
Pelvic floor muscle training, alone or combined with bladder control strategies and self-monitoring, should be
recommended for older women with urinary incontinence.
Risk of Falls
Recommendation 9:
Medication review and withdrawal (of unnecessary or harmful medication) can be recommended for older people at
risk of falls.
Recommendation 10:
Multimodal exercise should be recommended for older people at risk of falls.
Recommendation 11:
Following a specialist’s assessment, home modifications to remove environmental hazards that could cause falls
should be recommended for older people at risk of falls.
Recommendation 12:
Multifactorial interventions integrating assessment with individually tailored interventions can be recommended to
reduce the risk and incidence of falls among older people.
Adapted from WHO (2017: ix)
Table 7. WHO Module III Guidelines
Module III: Caregiver Support
Recommendation 13:
Psychological intervention, training and support should be offered to family members and other informal caregivers of care-dependent
older people, particularly but not exclusively when the need for care is complex and extensive and/or there is significant caregiver strain.
Adapted from WHO (2017: ix)
265
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
and Health, created an inter-ministerial working group to present a proposal for a National Strategy for
Active and Healthy Aging. This working group presented the National Strategy for Active and Healthy
Aging 2017-2025 (NSAHA), in 2017 (RP, SNS, 2017). Based on WHO (2015) guidelines, the NSAHA
2017-2025 is based on four strategic axes (Health; Participation; Safety; Measurement, Monitoring and
Research). Guidelines are presented for each axis (Table 8). For each guideline, actions and the entities
involved are defined, which go through different institutions from the different Ministries involved.
In Portugal, the Social Security, with the help of private initiatives, provides various social responses
to meet the needs of the elderly population. Thus, besides the elderly person being cared for by a formal
or informal caregiver at home, the social responses for the elderly are centered on Home Support
Service, Conviviality Center, Day Center, Night Center, Family Shelter for the Elderly, Residential
Structures, the Vacation and Leisure Center (Portuguese Social Security, 2021), and also the National
Network for Integrated Continued Care (SNS, 2021).
There are many unpaid workers, particularly older adults, who are still productive, generating economic
and social value. A generally invisible worker is the informal caregiver, which can be young adults
caring for an older family member or older adults caring for either grandchildren or the ‘older old’. The
social value of such unpaid work is considerable but not regularly quantified, and therefore in general
goes unrecognized (Greer et al., 2021). According to the 2020 study by the Informal Caregivers Movement,
it is estimated that there are close to 1.4 million informal caregivers in Portugal (Carrilho, 2020).
Similarly to the Damásio’s research (2019, 2020), in which the sharing of experiences and information
was crucial for the construction of the social network resulting from the mutual help emerging from the
relationship established through the blog of people with cancer disease, also a group of caregivers and
former caregivers who met on social networks, created the National Association of Informal Caregivers,
in Portugal. Technology-mediated communication allows new forms of interaction, in which people
who are in similar situations create virtual communities that can then move on to face-to-face meetings
(Damásio & Fontes, 2022).
In 2016, a citizenship movement was launched to dignify informal caregivers, culminating in a petition
for the creation of the Statute of the Informal Caregiver at the first meeting of informal caregivers.
The statute was officially approved in Portugal in 2019 with the publication of Law No. 100/2019
Table 8. Portugal’s NSAHA Guidelines
National Strategy for Active and Healthy Aging
Strategic Axes Guidelines
Health - Healthy Lifestyle Promotion and Health Surveillance.
- Management of Comorbidity Processes.
Participation - Education and training throughout the life cycle.
- Creation of environments that foster integration and participation.
Safety - Creation of physical environments that ensure safety and security.
- Identification, signaling and support in situations of vulnerability.
Measurement, Monitoring and
Research - Measurement, Monitoring and Research.
Based on RP, SNS (2017)
266
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
on September 6. This statute provides a set of regulations for the rights and duties of the caregiver and
the person being cared for, and establishes support measures for both parties. Regulatory Decree No.
1/2022 was later issued on January 10, which defined the terms and conditions for recognizing informal
caregiver status and outlined support measures for both caregivers and those receiving care.
According to this law, the person being cared for must: require permanent and dependent care from
a third party; receive first or second degree dependency benefits or third person care allowance; have
informed consent from the guardian or companion if applicable; have informed consent from the companion
in the case of the Accompanied Major Regime (Law no. 49/2018, of August 14) if applicable;
and may receive temporary housing in a social or health institution.
The Informal Caregiver can be the spouse or unmarried partner, relative or kin up to the 4th degree
of the line or the collateral line of the person being cared for (Ex: children, grandchildren, greatgrandchildren,
great-great-grandchildren, siblings parents, uncles, grandparents, great-grandparents,
great-great-grandparents, great-uncles or cousins). The legal requirements to be an Informal Caregiver
are centered on: having legal residence in Portugal; being over 18 years old; having physical and psychological
capacities; to be a husband/wife, partner or relative to the 4th degree; not to be a recepient
of a disability pension. The Informal Caregiver has the following duties: to provide the necessary care;
to provide food, personal hygiene and housing; to promote safety, comfort, tranquility and leisure; to
communicate with health professionals; to ensure health treatments; to inform Social Security in case
of any change to the Informal Caregiver Status. Informal Caregivers have the advantages of benefiting
from support measures; benefiting from “Caregiver Respite”; being helped by a network of professionals
of reference; accessing self-help groups; getting specialized training and information; getting support in
integrating into the labor market when caregiving ends.
There are two types of caregivers: Primary Informal Caregiver and Informal Non-Primary Caregiver.
The Informal Primary Caregiver is the caregiver who accompanies and cares for the person being cared
for on a permanent basis, who lives in the same household as the person being cared for, and does not
earn any remuneration from professional activity or for the care they provide to the person being cared
for. The Principal Informal Caregiver can be attributed, if eligible, with a subsidy according to the
household income and access to Voluntary Social Security.
The Informal Non-Primary Caregiver is the person who provides regular care for someone, but
not on a permanent basis. They may or may not receive remuneration for their caregiving services.
The Informal Non-Primary Caregiver enjoys the advantage of being able to balance caregiving with
employment; has access to telework for up to four years; can benefit from the Student Worker Regime
and Supportive Labor Legislation. For each person receiving care, up to three Informal Non-Primary
Caregivers can be recognized.
The Home Support Service is a social response that consists in providing care and services to families
and/or people who are at home, in a situation of physical and/or psychological dependence and who
cannot ensure, temporarily or permanently, the satisfaction of their basic needs and/or the performance
of instrumental activities of daily living, nor have family support for this purpose (Administrative Rule
no. 38/2013, January 30). This service is provided by institutions licensed by Social Security. The support
is available every day and provides the following services: hygiene care and personal comfort, home
cleaning, meal preparation and support while respecting medical dietary prescriptions, laundry services
and socialization activities. Additionally, it may also include training and awareness sessions for family
members and informal caregivers on providing care to the user, psychosocial support, home cooking,
transportation, personal grooming, minor repairs and changes at home, and occupational activities.
267
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
The Conviviality Center is a social response to support social, recreational, and cultural activities,
organized and stimulated with the active participation of the elderly, residents of a given community.
This social response aims to prevent loneliness and isolation; to encourage the participation and inclusion
of the elderly in the local social life; to encourage interpersonal relationships and between generations
and to contribute to delay or avoid as much as possible the internment in institutions (Portuguese Social
Security, 2021).
The Day Center is a social response that provides a set of services that contribute to the maintenance
in their social and family environment, of people aged 65 and over. Its goals are: to ensure the provision
of care and services appropriate to meet the needs and expectations of the user; to prevent situations of
dependence and promote autonomy; to promote personal and intergenerational relationships; to encourage
the permanence of the elderly in their usual environment; to contribute to delay or avoid as much
as possible the internment in institutions; and to promote strategies for the development of the user’s
self-esteem, autonomy, functionality, and personal and social independence (Ibid., 2021).
The Night Center is a social response that operates in equipment for nocturnal shelter, aimed at
elderly people with autonomy who, during the day remain at home and who, by experiencing situations
of loneliness, isolation and insecurity, need monitoring during the night. It is intended to accommodate
people with autonomy during the night; to ensure the user’s well-being and safety; and to promote the
permanence of the user in his/hers usual way of life (Ibid., 2021; Ordinance Nr 96/2013, of March 4th).
Family Shelter for the Elderly is a social response that consists in integrating, temporarily or permanently,
elderly people into families capable of providing them with a stable and safe environment.
This social response aims to: welcome elderly people who are in a situation of dependence or loss of
autonomy, live isolated and without social and family support and/or in a situation of insecurity; ensure
that the person receives a social, family and affective environment conducive to the satisfaction of their
needs and respect for their identity, personality and privacy; avoid or delay as much as possible the internment
in institutions. No more than two people should be housed in each family (Portuguese Social
Security, 2021; Decree-Law Nr 391/91, of October 10th).
The Residential Structures are destined to collective lodging, of temporary or permanent use, for
the elderly. With these it is intended to: provide permanent and adequate services to the biopsychosocial
problems of the elderly; contribute to the stimulation of an active aging process; create conditions
that allow the preservation and encouragement of intra-family relationships; enhance social integration
(Portuguese Social Security, 2021; Ordinance Nr 67/2012, of March 21st).
The Vacation and Leisure Center is a social response aimed at all age groups of the population and
at the family as a whole to meet the leisure needs and break the routine, essential to the physical, psychological,
and social balance of its users. It seeks to provide stays outside their routine of life; contacts
with different communities and spaces; experiences in groups, as forms of social integration; promotion
of the development of the spirit of mutual help; and fostering of the creative capacity and of the spirit
of initiative (Portuguese Social Security, 2021).
Due to the increasing demand for care from elderly people with functional limitations, patients with
multiple chronic illnesses, and people in the end-of-life stage of incurable diseases, and the lack of adequate
long-term and palliative care, the National Network for Integrated Continued Care (NNICC)
was established in 2006. The NNICC operates under the auspices of the Ministry of Health and the
Ministry of Labor and Social Solidarity.
The NNICC is part of the National Health Service and the Social Security System and is made up
of different types of units and teams, four inpatient units - Convalescence Units; Medium Term and
268
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Rehabilitation Units; Long Duration and Maintenance Units; Palliative Care Units, one outpatient unit -
Day Care and Autonomy Promotion Unit and one home care unit - Integrated Continuous Care Teams,
excluding the network of pediatric and mental health institutions, and one outpatient unit - Day and
Autonomy Promotion Unit (Decree-Law Nr 101/2006, of June 6th) (Figure 6).
Users can be proposed for NNICC responses in two ways:
1. If they are admitted to a National Health Service hospital;
2. If they are in the community (home, private hospital or other institutions or establishments)
(Decree-Law Nr 101/2006, of June 6th). The referral process is done on a specific computer platform
(GestCare@CCI) and involves articulation between the different teams involved in the process.
In the case of the hospital, that includes the Discharge Management Team and the NNICC Local
Coordinating Team (SNS, 2021).
At the end of 2019 there were 8867 inpatient places for dependent adults and the elderly at NNICC,
of which 1078 were Convalescence Units, 2873 for Medium Term and Rehabilitation Units and 4916
for Long Duration and Maintenance Units. Overall, since the beginning of the pilot experience in 2006,
the number of inpatient places has been gradually increasing. Each user can have more than one referral
ticket. The main reasons for referral, with 90% and 89.5% respectively, were “Dependence on Activities
of Daily Living ‘’ and “Teaching user/Informal Caregiver”. In addition to these reasons, they include:
Rehabilitation (62.2%); Post-Surgical Care (20.6%); Wound/Pressure Ulcer Treatment (15.4%); Cardiovascular
Disease (14.5%); Therapeutic Regimen Management (13%); Caregiver Respite (11.3%);
Figure 6. Schematic Representation of the NNICC Constitution
Adapted from Oliveira (2018: 9)
269
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Nasogastric Tube/Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy Carriers (7.7%); Multiple Pressure Ulcers
(6%); and Device Maintenance (4.1%). The population aged 65+ at NNICC accounted for 84.4% of the
total; aged 80+ accounted for 51.1% of the total. In 2019, a total of 50093 users were assisted in Convalescence
Units, Medium Term and Rehabilitation Units and Long Duration and Maintenance Units
(SNS & ACSS, 2019).
Despite the increasing number of vacancies made available over the years, the care needs have also
been growing. On December 31, 2021, 1310 users were waiting for a vacancy at the NNICC (1.6% more
than at the end of 2020). The largest number of waiting users is concentrated in the Long Duration and
Maintenance Units (Ibid., 2019). The longest waiting time until identification of a vacancy, in 2021,
was in the Long Duration and Maintenance Units, reaching about 54 days in the Algarve health region.
The number of inpatient days varies according to the unit’s typology. We highlight the Long Duration
and Maintenance Units, which are the most sought after, with an average length of stay of 462 days, also
in the Algarve. The regions with the longest waiting time for identification of a vacancy are also those
with the longest average length of stay (ERS, 2022).
The Health Regulatory Authority (HRA) conducted a study of the proximity of the population to the
NNICC and found that practically all the residents in mainland Portugal live 60 minutes or less from a
NNICC facility. However, given the scarcity of supply, the greater or lesser proximity to a NNICC unit
does not ensure access to this type of care, much less that the user is placed in the unit closest to his/
her residence (Ibid., 2022). This can take the person being cared for away from the family at a time of
special vulnerability, also increasing anxiety and sometimes some “guilt” to the family for not being
able to care or visit. Added to this is the increased financial burden that this distance can entail for visits.
There have been several studies in Portugal on the NNICC. Oliveira (2018) analyzed these studies
and highlighted that:
• The referral and discharge of patients to the NNICC, in certain places in the country caused an
increase in length of stay and associated hospital costs, compromising the objectives of creating
the network (Ferreira, 2012 cit. by Oliveira, 2018);
• There are primary health care teams that have difficulties in referring patients to the NNICC (bureaucratization,
communication difficulties, lack of training, absence of inpatient units close to the
user’s home) (Fernandes, 2013 cti. by Oliveira, 2018);
• Complexity in the use of the referral software (GestCare@CCI) (Sepúlveda, 2013 cit. by Oliveira,
2018);
• The decision on the patients’ destinations after hospital discharge has several criteria, including
the characteristics of the dependent patient, the family, the community and the health services’
responses, with nursing criteria having the greatest relevance in the decision (Petronilho, Pereira,
& Silva, 2014);
• In some parts of the country, the process of signaling and referral of patients to Integrated
Continuous Care Teams has some constraints, such as little dissemination, unclear inclusion criteria,
lack of training of professionals, lack of discharge planning, late signaling and referrals, delay
in response time, and asymmetries between Integrated Continuous Care Teams (Cunha, 2017,
cited by Oliveira, 2018).
The work of Oliveira (2018), fused on a Portuguese region, also pointed out some constraints in the
NNICC. At the procedural level, there are difficulties, especially in terms of professional resources in
270
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
the meeting of the user’s assessment team and in the application of the computer application (Oliveira,
Brou & Damásio, 2020). The researcher suggests the constitution of a specific team for referral. Shortage
of human and material resources was also identified.
However, the general feedback from users and caregivers about this state initiative is mostly positive
(Oliveira, 2018; Oliveira, Damásio, & Brou, 2020).
ELDERLY CARE IN NORTH MACEDONIA
In North Macedonia elderly rights are protected by the Constitution as well as by the Law on Social Protection
of Elderly People (OGRNM, 2019). In the last decade the Ministry of Labor and Social Services
established a legislature to support the creation of a network of social services directed towards elderly
and also to stimulate private and civil society investment in such services. The aging population is in
demand, as never before, for better access to nursing homes as well as to community services. The care
of elderly is organized as residential long-term care and community social services that are delivered
in a formal and informal way. The established regulations allow public, private body or civic society
institutions to organize and operate a residential institution for social protection of elderly/geriatrics or
services based in the community such as Day-care centers and Services for Homecare and Assistance
for elderly. The healthcare sector also provides general and specialized services for elderly.
Health-care and social care are closely linked, however, the integration of health and social services
for older people is on a minimal level (WHO, 2021). Currently, there is a lack of communication among
local health and social care service providers to enable timely referrals for older people to receive the
appropriate level of care. While the coordination and continuity of care among healthcare providers is
facilitated through a system of referrals and access to electronic health records using the “Moj Termin”
(“My Appointment”) platform, the country’s health and social care systems are relatively disjointed, with
limited formal mechanisms for referral between them. This lack of integration results in older people’s
needs not being effectively addressed.
The Primary healthcare (General/Family Medicine Practitioners) system is one of the most functional
reforms that was implemented in the Republic of North Macedonia healthcare system. The system
is based on monthly payment per patient where the doctor receives a bigger amount for the care of
children and elderly compared to younger adults. Due to the high prevalence of chronic health issues,
physical limitations caused by these health problems and the complex care required to effectively manage
them, older people are likely to require more frequent access to both general practitioners (GPs)/
family medicine doctors and specialists. In 2019, this type of healthcare appointment accounted for 22%
of total GP/family medicine doctor visits. Additionally, older people on average had almost twice as
many GP/family medicine doctor consultations per person per year compared to those under 65 years
old. The Health Insurance Fund recognizes the complexity of the needs of older people and the crucial
role of GPs/family medicine doctors in addressing them. They have implemented a capitation payment
mechanism that takes into account the age of the person, in order to provide an appropriate incentive
for GPs/family medicine doctors to work with older people. The upholding threat to the effectiveness of
primary healthcare of GPs/family medicine doctors network is the rise of the average age of the doctors,
and uneven distribution in some regions, especially rural areas.
Geriatric medicine, hospice and palliative care is delivered by one geriatric institution based in
Skopje. The public health institution Specialized Hospital for Geriatric and Palliative Medicine “13
271
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Noemvri” is the only specialized institution that provides health care in the field of Geriatric and Palliative
Medicine in the Republic of North Macedonia. It provides outpatient specialist consultations
and inpatient health care provided through the Geriatrics department (intensive care, acute and chronic
illness departments). Palliative care is currently only available at two hospices, located in Skopje and
Bitola, with a total of 150 beds. These facilities are consistently at capacity and have a long waiting list.
The hospital works intensively on the development and improvement of the treatment in the patient’s
home as well as on the development of the Day Hospital. A significant part is the medical-gerontological
education, which consists of continuous professional development, primarily in diagnostics, specificities
in treatment, rehabilitation and prevention of diseases in old age, preservation of the functional abilities
of the geriatric patient by encouraging a positive attitude of the old people to take care of own health.
Geriatric wards in general hospitals operate in a few general hospitals in regions with no available
services of public nursing homes or hospice. These wards are able to deliver healthcare for geriatric
patients long-term and the expenses are covered by Health insurance Fund and out-of-pocket money.
However the capacity of geriatric wards is very limited.
The Community nursing service (patronage nurse) provides home visits to patients, mainly to offer
advisory services for new mothers and newborns (more than 60% of the time), the elderly and individuals
with chronic illnesses. However, the number of such visits is quite limited due to the major obstacles
facing such services, such as the shortage of field vehicles and nursing staff. The home nursing service
is only available in 36 out of 85 municipalities across the country. Although the existing 36 Community
nursing services should provide home visits throughout the country, it is impossible to cover the entire
area with the current resources.
Healthcare service provided in the home of the patient is a healthcare public service that operates
closely with the emergency medicine unit. This service carries out home treatment in cases where hospital
treatment is not necessary, such as immobile or poorly mobile patients, chronically ill patients whose
condition deteriorates or complications arise, after complex surgeries that require dressing and wound
care and for patients in the terminal phase of the disease.
Overall older people are not satisfied with the level of healthcare they receive, due to long waitinglists,
difficulties with the accessibility of health-care services and the financial burden of the medication
costs and other necessary out-of-pocket payments. The professionals in healthcare have their share of
discontent too. The WHO study on the access to healthcare for older people in North Macedonia, revealed
that the significant burden of caring for older people among healthcare workers has had a negative
impact on their motivation levels. Additionally, there are inadequate mechanisms in place to support the
well-being of healthcare workers, and insufficient incentives for patient- and family-centered practice,
as well as limited opportunities for professional development and continuing education (WHO, 2021).
The 18th principal Statement of the European Pillar of Social rights states: “Everyone has the right
to affordable long-term care services of good quality, in particular home-care and community-based
services” (European Commission, 2021). Affordable long-term care has become one of the 20th pillars
of social rights in the EU, stressing its importance for the aging population all around the Union. The
research of Tinios, Valvis & Georgiadis (2022) unraveled discrepancy between the countries systems
for long-term care and difficulty to appropriately assess the effectiveness of the long-care models. The
authors find especially interesting their finding that ‘Greater expenditure does not seem to guarantee
greater success in responding to needs’. The residential care being the most expensive long-term solution
should be adequately balanced with the community services, both formal and informal. Countries
that utilize a combination of formal and informal care in their healthcare systems can benefit from the
272
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
strengths of both. These systems can effectively balance the needs of caregivers, care recipients, and the
allocation of resources. The policies should support familial or informal caregivers and strive to optimize
the relationship between formal and informal systems.
The benefits of professional long-term care range from assistance with daily living, medical care,
ensuring safety and supervision to increased socialization and providing peace of mind to the family
members, all done with coordination and efficacy.
The traditional Macedonian cultural worldview is collectivist. In collectivist cultures, individuals
tend to put the goals of the family before their own personal aspirations. Older people from collectivist
cultures are less likely to consider action that separates them from their family (ECCV, 2015). The
negative attitude towards leaving one’s own home and moving to a residential long-term care facility,
is a strong mentality feature in Macedonian elderly population. The older family members often have
expectations from their children to help them during their aging and to be their caregivers in their own
home or their children’s home. This model was efficient in the second half of the 20th century, but proved
to be more and more difficult to uphold. The emigration of young families, the relocation of young
people from rural to urban areas and the smaller size of the families have made this unrealistic outcome
for many of the elderly. Another reason why this model is not sustainable is the inability of children,
especially women, to find enough time to take the caregiving role that is mostly expected out of them.
Without a well-built and fairly distributed network of social services for care of elderly, the long-term
care system in North Macedonia is strongly reliant on informal care. The role of family members as
informal caregivers is especially evident in the rural areas and smaller towns. The state supports the
informal caregiving by cash benefits for people with disabilities and their families and a care part-time
work allowance, organized and financed by the central government. Benefits in kind, which fall under
the combined responsibility of the central and local governments, remain a more marginal aspect of the
system as the result of limited infrastructure, particularly in rural areas (InCARE, 2022). The research
results of the InCARE project indicate that there is strong agreement among respondents on the need
for providing adequate financial and social support for informal caregivers. Nearly 90% of respondents
concurred that informal care work should be acknowledged as a formal occupation, rewarded with social
insurance and a dependable income. Additionally, a majority of respondents also believed that the
government should provide financial assistance to informal caregivers who have to reduce their working
hours or leave employment to provide care. Despite the efforts of the Government to decentralize and
modernize the social care system for elderly, the informal caregivers and their role remains unrecognized.
In 2019, the new Law on Social Protection initiated a meaningful reform of the sector by providing a
legal framework for establishment, operation and financing of various community-based services. Four
years later, there was a shift towards decentralization of care, increased involvement of the municipalities
by planning, developing and financing of social services. In the last 5 years the situation is changing
towards opening diverse community-based services for elderly in two forms: Day-care Centers and
Services for Home care and Assistance for elderly.
According to the Law on Social Protection, Residential Care for Elderly citizens is regulated by the
Government. The elderly have the right to be placed in social protection institutions, which are under the
jurisdiction of local self-government. There are currently four public homes for elderly in three cities:
Skopje, Bitola, Prilep and Kumanovo, with a total accommodation capacity of 620 beds. The private
sector of long-term care residential institutions for social protection is growing, reaching 39 private
homes, predominantly located in the capital Skopje. However, a very small percentage of the elderly
population, less than 1%, are living in these facilities. This is lower than the recommended 3-5% of elderly
273
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
population living in residential facilities according to EU standards, indicating a need for more homes
for the elderly. The costs of long-term care in the publicly owned residential institutions is covered by
the taxes and out-of-pocket money. The privately owned residential homes are completely financed with
out-of-pocket payments. The cost of the residential long-term care services and its affordability is the
biggest barrier for elderly (InCARE, 2022), followed by the attitudes of older people regarding leaving
their homes and availability of residential service in the nearby area.
The Services for Homecare and Assistance for elderly provide assistance and support in performing
basic and instrumental activities of daily living for the user. Basic activities of daily living include:
maintaining personal hygiene, dressing, mobility within the home, help with feeding, using the toilet,
and changing continence products. Instrumental activities of daily living include: support with cleaning,
assistance with small home repairs, shopping, cooking, purchasing groceries, mobility outside of the
home, assistance with taking medicines, using the telephone, and assistance with budget management
(Ministry of Labor and Social Policy, 2019). In 2017 services for Home care and Assistance were used
only by a very small number of elderly people ranging from 0.3% of people with primary and secondary
education, up to 0.9% elderly with higher education (Red Cross, 2017). After the implementation
of the new Social Security Law in 2019, the provision of this service has increased, however, capacity,
accessibility, and availability are still inadequate. Only a few civil society organizations are involved in
providing services to elderly in North Macedonia, particularly services related to home-based care and
support. The majority of these services are operated by the Red Cross, 13 out of 20 licensed providers
are Red Cross branches. This service is fully covered by the Ministry of Labor and Social Politics only
for elderly who have functional inability to care for themselves and have no able adults in their household
to care for them.
The Day-care centers for elderly can be established as Centers for Active Aging, or a Day-care Center
that provides care or some form of rehabilitation service. There are few licensed providers of service.
Day centers in certain towns mainly promote social interaction among active older adults and do not
provide professional care. The Union of Retired Persons is actively involved in promoting the well-being
of older adults, including advocating for their health and social care needs. However, there is no formal
involvement of community members or organizations in the delivery of health or social care services
for older adults, and any community services provided are done so on an occasional or project basis.
Currently, care services may not always be fully equipped to create personalized care plans for older
adults, taking into account their unique health and social care needs, goals, and preferences. However,
efforts are being made to improve this and provide more tailored and person-centered support. Although
a lot was done in terms of reforms, legal framework, deinstitutionalization, decentralization, still the
constatation made in 2011 also stands today, that for a good and durable implementation of the longterm
care system it is necessary to promote the model of public-private partnership in cooperation with
the non-governmental sector and the local self-government units (Macedonian Anti-Poverty Platform,
2011). In the matter of financial stability and sustainability of the system, it will be very important to
seek new sources of funding for long-term services. Public funds will always be limited by the GDP
and never sufficient to cover all demands. Therefore, there is an urgent need to seek opportunities to
provide better financial construction for social services for elderly through private funds in the form of
insurance for care.
274
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
PORTUGAL AND NORTH MACEDONIA: SIMILARITIES
AND DIFFERENCES IN ELDERLY CARE
The systems of elderly care differ greatly among countries, reflecting variations in cultural values, economic
resources, and political priorities. Despite this, all countries strive to provide older adults with
the necessary support and resources to maintain their health and well-being. Portugal and North Macedonia
are no exception, as both countries’ systems of elderly care share the common goal of promoting
the well-being of older adults by addressing their physical, emotional, and social needs. Both countries
deliver medical and non-medical/social care through both residential and community-based services.
In addition to promoting independence and autonomy, both the systems of elderly care in Portugal
and North Macedonia also strive to improve the interconnection between healthcare and social care
for older adults. This can include having care providers work closely with older adults and their family
members to develop and implement care plans that best address their needs and improve overall health
and quality of life. Furthermore, both countries aim to provide older adults with the tools and resources
they need to maintain their independence, such as assistive devices and technology, as well as education
and training to help them manage their own health and wellness. This ensures that older adults are
able to live as independently as possible and improve their overall quality of life. Portugal has made
great progress in formalizing and improving connection between healthcare and social care for elderly
through the establishment of the National Network for Integrated Continued Care in 2006. This unique
system, adapted to Portuguese circumstances, laid foundations for accessible, affordable and economic
care for most of the population.
One of the biggest challenges to the elderly care systems is the provision and effective distribution
of financial resources. This is not an easy task, regarding the aging population and their growing needs.
While both Portugal and North Macedonia aim to provide older adults with the support and resources
they need to maintain their health and well-being, North Macedonia faces several challenges in achieving
this goal. One of the main challenges is the limited financial resources and lack of human resources in
healthcare and social services. The number of trained professionals is lower in North Macedonia, with
fewer healthcare staff overall, as well as fewer trained caregivers for community services. Additionally,
the geriatric field is not perceived as attractive by healthcare staff, as they see it as demanding with
limited career advancement opportunities. Furthermore, the number of trained caregivers for community
social services is small, due to the recent focus on training and community service development for the
elderly, only in the last decade. This is additionally compounded by the large-scale emigration of young
people from the country, which reduces the potential workforce, as well as leaves more older people
with unmet needs for assistance.
Even though Portugal’s population is one of the oldest in Europe, the country is in a better position in
terms of the workforce both in healthcare and social services. Portugal started developing communitybased
social services in the 20th century, leading to the current diversity of available services. This has
helped to ensure that older adults have access to a wide range of support and resources to help them
maintain their health and well-being. Despite the diversity of services offered in Portugal to the elderly
population, it can be seen that they are insufficient to meet the needs of the population. Furthermore,
as in North Macedonia, the careers for working with the elderly are not attractive. Although there are
already professionals with specific training, they are not valued in relation to those who have no training,
which does not encourage people to invest in training.
275
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
North Macedonia is in the process of developing a decentralized concept of elderly care, with the
adoption of basic legislation that has led to the growth of new community-based services. In the last
five years, the legislation has become operational, and some services have been established and are
functional. This has allowed for the evaluation of the effects and functionality of the established services,
the creation of a wider network of services that are more accessible to the population living in remote
areas, and a deeper assessment of the contemporary needs of the elderly population. It also provides
an opportunity for the development of additional services in the community, and the improvement of
existing legislation to be more inclusive and functional.
On the other hand, Portugal has made an important breakthrough in social care by regulating the status
of informal caregivers. North Macedonia recognizes the importance of informal caregivers in elderly
care, but currently lacks legislation that formally recognizes this status, or provides support beyond giving
in-kind financial support to elderly in need of assistance and care. Despite the recognition provided
by law and the status of the informal caregiver already being regulated, the process of its attribution
is complex and bureaucratic, which requires some digital literacy, which most caregivers do not have,
leading to the majority not benefiting from it yet.
Both in Portugal and in North Macedonia systems of elderly care, the role of the government in financing
and providing care is crucial. In North Macedonia, the government provides funding for elderly
care from general tax collection. In Portugal, the working population contributes to social assistance.
However, the investment in the social sector is not sufficient to meet the growing needs, resulting in
elderly care largely being provided and/or paid for out of pocket. The private sector is rapidly developing
in residential care, with little government support for new public facilities and limited investments
to maintain existing infrastructure. The current financing of elderly social care is not adequate, so the
North Macedonia’s government may consider implementing a system of social insurance, where adults
pay into the system through their working years. To cope with this situation, in Portugal the retirement
age has been increasing over the last twenty years, justified by the increase in average life expectancy.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic, average life expectancy has fallen, so the government has lowered the
retirement age by one year from the previous year.
Portugal finances elderly care through a combination of social security, pensions and taxes, which
helps to ensure that elderly care is accessible to part of the population. Despite policies, some resources,
good care and promotion of active aging is much more accessible to those who are more literate and
have greater financial facilities.
Both countries share some similarities in mentality and lifestyle, being Southern European countries
with strong cohesion in the family system. As a result, elderly people in both countries prefer to stay
in their homes as long as possible and use home-based care and support services. In Portugal, this is
achievable for a large part of the elderly population, compared to North Macedonia, where home-based
services are still in the early stages of development.
Finally, it is important to note that the quality of elderly care also differs between Portugal and North
Macedonia. It is reasonable to assume that the quality of elderly care is generally better in Portugal than
in North Macedonia. This is not only because Portugal invests more finances in social services, but also
because it has a better network and more diverse community-based social services than North Macedonia.
Additionally, the recognition of informal caregivers in Portugal significantly improves the quality
of life of the elderly and their family’s well-being.
276
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
CONCLUSION
The WHO has been advocating for health equity and governance, recognizing that social action and
environmental factors play a significant role in overcoming health disparities (WHO, 2019a). With improved
living conditions and healthcare, life expectancy has been increasing worldwide. According to the
WHO’s 2019 estimates (WHO, 2019b), boys born that year will have an average life expectancy of 69.8
years, while girls will live an average of 74.2 years. However, despite women living longer than men,
these additional years are not always spent in good health. The health status of a given area, whether it
is a region or a country, is shaped by various factors such as demographics, health practices, and socioeconomic
variables. The politics of aging, as noted by Greer et al. (2021), is a politics of inequality, in
which aging is no longer a uniform process.
In recent years, there has been a global trend towards an aging population, with increasing average
life expectancy, improved living conditions, and better healthcare. However, this trend has also led to a
decrease in the percentage of young people in the total population, due to lower birth rates and emigration.
Portugal and North Macedonia are among the countries facing the challenge of demographic aging,
and despite improvements in healthcare, many older people still experience high levels of dependence
on others for self-care, which affects their overall health and well-being.
From this background the following questions emerged:
• Which contexts of elderly care exist in Portugal and in North Macedonia?
• What is the distribution of elderly care in Portugal and in North Macedonia?
• What advancements have been made in recent years to enhance the national systems of elderly
care in both Portugal and North Macedonia?
In order to answer these questions, we opted for a narrative literature review.
After characterizing the WHO guidelines on aging, we examined the care of the elderly and described
the care settings in Portugal and North Macedonia.
In Portugal, the rights of the elderly are not protected by specific legislation. However, relevant strategies
and reforms have been developed by the Ministries of Health and Social Security. The National
Strategy for Active and Healthy Aging 2017-2025, based on the WHO guidelines (WHO, 2015), was
developed in response to a decision by the European Parliament and the Council in 2011. Four strategic
axes were defined: Health, Participation, Safety, and Measurement, Monitoring and Research. Guidelines
were also defined for each strategic axis, and for each guideline, actions and the entities involved
were specified, involving various institutions from different Ministries. Social Security, with the help
of private initiatives, provides various social responses aimed at meeting the needs of the elderly population.
These include Home Support Service, Conviviality Center, Day Center, Night Center, Family
Shelter for the Elderly, Residential Structures, Vacation and Leisure Center, and the National Network
for Integrated Continued Care. Among the various policies to support aging, we highlight the publication
of the Informal Care Statute in 2019, which sought to regulate the rights and duties of caregivers
and those being cared for.
The shortage of resources and the need for elderly care has led to an important response known as the
National Network for Integrated Continued Care. This network was created in 2006 under the auspices
of the Ministries of Health and Labor and Social Security, and includes several units: Inpatient Units
277
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
(Convalescence Units, Medium-Term and Rehabilitation Units, Long Durations and Maintenance Units,
and Palliative Care Units); Outpatient Units, and Home Care Units.
As far as North Macedonia is concerned, the rights of the elderly are protected by the Constitution
and the Law on Social Protection of Elderly People. There has been an effort and an investment in the
creation of social services directed towards elderly and also to stimulate private and civil society investment
in such services. Despite the efforts of the Government to decentralize and modernize the social
care system for elderly, the informal caregivers and their role remains unrecognized. There is some
difficulty in communication between different health care providers and social care services, which
translates into older people having difficulty receiving the level of care they need. Older people can use
primary health care, and while in cities the primary healthcare is accessible, some of the rural population
is left out. Geriatric medicine, hospice and palliative care are oriented towards medical treatment
and geriatric education, mainly in diagnosis, specificities in treatment, rehabilitation and prevention of
diseases in old age, preservation of functional abilities of the geriatric patient, encouraging a positive
attitude of the elderly to take care of their own health, which meets the emanation of the WHO (2015).
Some general hospitals also have geriatric wards, which are able to deliver health-care for geriatric
patients long-term. The community nursing service, available in 36 of the country’s 85 municipalities,
offers visits to patients in their homes. The elderly can also be cared for in their home. This is a public
care service that operates close to the emergency services, which provides care at home when hospital
treatment is dispensable in situations of immobility, chronic illness with complications, after complex
surgery or for patients in the terminal phase of the disease. Elderly can also be cared for at Day-care
Centers, at Services for Homecare and Assistance for elderly and also at Residential Care for Elderly.
About the reflection on the similarities and differences in elderly care in Portugal and North Macedonia,
it was concluded that both countries aim to provide older adults with the support and resources
they need to maintain their health and well-being. However, the systems of elderly care vary, reflecting
differences in cultural values, economic resources, and political priorities. While Portugal has a strong
and more flexible system of elderly care, North Macedonia is still working on improving its system and
providing better care for its elderly population.
Both in Portugal and in North Macedonia, the careers of professionals caring for the elderly are not
valued, often due to lack of regulation, but also due to lack of training of these professionals. In this sense,
it would be very pertinent to conduct a study on the analysis of training in gerontology in both countries.
REFERENCES
Abreu, W. C. (2003). Saúde, Doença e diversidade cultural. Instituto Piaget.
Administrative Rule. (2013). Condições de instalação e funcionamento do serviço de apoio domiciliário.
Diário da República, 1(21), 605 – 608.
Associação de Apoio à Vítima (APAV) (2020). Relatório Portugal mais velho. APAV, Fundação Calouste
Gulbenkian. https://apav.pt/apav_v3/index.php/pt/2488-relatorio-portugal-mais-velho
Carrilho, A. (2020). Perto de 1,4 milhões de pessoas em Portugal são cuidadores informais. Observador.
https://observador.pt/2020/11/05/perto-de-14-milhoes-de-pessoas-em-portugal-sao-cuidadores-informais/
278
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Constituição da República Portuguesa [Constitution of the Portuguese Republic]. (1976) Decreto de
aprovação da Constituição. Diário da República n.º 86.
Damásio, C. P. (2020). A formação de uma rede de ajuda mútua de pessoas com doença oncológica.
In: Fialho, J. (Ed.) (2020) Redes Sociais. Como compreendê-las? Uma Introdução à Análise de Redes
Sociais. Sílabo.
Damásio, C. P., & Fontes, B. (2022). Social Networks Mediated by the Internet and Health Care. In:
Sousa, M. J.; Marques, C. G. (Ed.) Innovations and Social Media Analytics in a Digital Society. (1st.
ed) CRC Press. doi:10.1201/9781003189848
Damásio, C. S. S. P. (2019). Do Blogue à Rede de Ajuda Mútua: Processo de Construção ao longo das
Transições da Pessoa com Doença Oncológica. [Nursing Doctoral Thesis, Lisbon: University of Lisbon]
http://hdl.handle.net/10451/38933
Decision, No. 940/2011/EU, 14/09. Sobre o Ano Europeu do Envelhecimento Activo e da Solidariedade
entre as Gerações (2012). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/PT/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32011D
0940&from=PT
Decree-Law Nr 47344, 25/11. Código Civil Português. Diário do Governo Nº 274/1966.
Decree-Law Nr 101/2006, 06/06. Cria a Rede Nacional de Cuidados Continuados Integrados. Diário
da República, 1ª Série A, Nº 109, p. 3856 – 3865.
Decree-Law Nr 391/91, 10/10. Regime de Acolhimento Familiar de Idosos e Adultos com Deficiência.
Diário da República, 1ª Série A, Nº 233, p. 5277 – 5281.
Direção Geral da Saúde. (2023). Obesidade. SNS24. https://www.sns24.gov.pt/tema/doencas-cronicas/
obesidade/#quais-sao-as-causas-da-obesidade
Entidade Reguladora da Saúde (ERS). (2022). Informação de Monitorização. Rede Nacional de Cuidados
Continuados Integrados. ERS. https://ipss-acaso.org/centro-recursos-online/download-documento/21
European Commission. (2021). The European Pillar of Social Rights in 20 principles. EC. https://commission.
europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/economy-works-people/jobs-growth-andinvestment/
european-pillar-social-rights/european-pillar-social-rights-20-principles_en
Ferreira, D., & Dias, P. (2016). História de Portugal. Verso da Kapa. https://research.unl.pt/ws/portalfiles/
portal/3381604/CHAM_Paulo_Dias_Fiogo_Ferreira_embargo_18_meses.pdf
Gião, N. D., Pereira, J. A. R., & Castelo Branco, M. (2020). Analysis of the Methodologues Apllied in
the Study of the Prevalence of Arterial Hypertension in Portugal. Revista Portuguesa de Hipertensão e
Risco Cardiovascular, 79, 15 - 25. https://www.sphta.org.pt/files/sphta_79_2020_0910.pdf
Góis, P., & Marques, J. C. (2018). Retrato de um Portugal Migrante: a evolução da emigração, da imigração
e do seu estudo nos últimos 40 anos. Open Edition. https://journals.openedition.org/eces/3307
279
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Government of the Republic of North Macedonia (GRNM). (2021). Resolution on migration policy of
the Republic of North Macedonia 2021-2025. GRNM. https://north-macedonia.iom.int/sites/g/files/
tmzbdl316/files/documents/Resolution%20on%20Migration%20Policy%20of%20The%20Republic%20
of%20North%20Macedonia.pdf
Greer, S. L., Lynch, J., Reeves, A., Façkenbach, M., Gingrich, J., Cylus, J., & Bambra, C. (2021). Ageing
and Health. The Politics of Better Policies. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108973236
InCARE. (2022). Attitudes, experiences and expectations on long-term care in North Macedonia. In-
CARE. https://incare.euro.centre.org/
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2019). Redução da população residente em 2018 menor que a de 2017,
Destaque INE. Instituto Nacional de Estatística. https://www.om.acm.gov.pt/-/destaque-estatistico-inereducao-
da-populacao-residente-em-2018-menor-que-a-de-2017-
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2020). Inquérito à Fecundidade. Instituto Nacional de Estatística.
https://www.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_destaques&DESTAQUESdest_boui=41565
5178&DESTAQUESmodo=2&xlang=pt
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2021a). Estatísticas Demográficas 2020. Instituto Nacional de Estatística.
https://www.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_publicacoes&PUBLICACOESpub_boui=44
2993507&PUBLICACOESmodo=2
Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE). (2021b). Taxa de mortalidade (30 a 70 anos) atribuída a doenças
do aparelho circulatório, tumores malignos, diabetes mellitus e doenças crónicas respiratórias por
100000 habitantes. INE. https://www.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_indicadores&conte
cto=pi&indOcorrCod=0009100&selTab=tab0
Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE). (2022) Statistics Portugal. INE. https://www.ine.pt/xportal/
xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_main
Lages, I. (2012/2013). A enfermagem e o cuidado cultural. FORUM, 47-48, 187–189.
Law Nr 49/2018, 14/08. Regime Jurídico do Maior Acompanhado. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº
156, p. 4072 – 4086.
Law Nr 100/2019, 06/09. Estatuto do Cuidador Informal. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 171, p. 3 – 16.
Macedonian Anti-Poverty Platform. (2011). Report on Poverty and Social Exclusion in the Republic of
Macedonia 2010. EAPN. https://www.eapn.eu/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/2011-eapn-fyrom-povertyand-
social-exclusion-in-rep-of-macedonia.pdf
Ministério dos Negócios, E. (2022). Património Mundial de Portugal. UNESCO. https://unescoportugal.
mne.gov.pt/pt/temas/proteger-o-nosso-patrimonio-e-promover-a-criatividade/patrimonio-mundial-emportugal
Ministry of Labor and Social Policy (2019). Правилник за начинот и обемот на социјалните услуги,
нормативите и стандардите за давање на социјалните услуги помош и нега во домот. Official
Gazette of R. North Macedonia,.268.
280
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
National Institutes of Health. (2021). Cultural Respect. NIH. https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nihoffice-
director/office-communications-public-liaison/clear-communication/cultural-respect
OECD. (2021). Preventing Harmful Alcohol Use. OECD Health Policy Studies, OECD Publishing.
doi:10.1787/6e4b4ffb-en
OGRNM. (2019). Law on Social Protection of Elderly People. Official Gazette of the Republic of North
Macedonia (OGRNM), 104.
Oliveira, C. R. (2021). Indicadores de integração de imigrantes: relatório estatístico anual 2021. (Imigração
em Números – Relatórios Anuais 6) . 1st ed.). Observatório das Migrações.
Oliveira, R. I., Brou, E. M. A., & Damásio, C. P. (2020). Processo de Referenciação para a RNCCI.
Análise através da Reengenharia de Processos. In: Nunes, L.; Poeira, A. F.; Canais, E. (Coord.) (2020)
Livro do I Congresso. Gestão em Enfermagem. Percursos e Desafios. Departamento de Enfermagem
ESS-IPS, p. 145. 10.13140/RG.2.2.36566.19523
Oliveira, R. I., Damásio, C. P., & Brou, E. M. A. (2020). Referenciação e Cuidados de Reabilitação
na RNCCI: Estudo de Caso. In: Nunes, L.; Poeira, A. F.; Canais, E. (Coord.) (2020) Livro do I Congresso.
Gestão em Enfermagem. Percursos e Desafios. Departamento de Enfermagem ESS-IPS, p. 144.
doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.3321075203
Oliveira, R. I. L. (2018). Rede Nacional de Cuidados Continuados Integrados (RNCCI): Um estudo
aprofundado sobre a eficácia e eficiência do seu desenho e funcionamento nomeadamente em Cuidados
de Reabilitação. [Master Thesis in Health Resource Management. Tomar: Instituto Politécnico de Tomar,
Escola Superior de Gestão de Tomar]. http://hdl.handle.net/10400.26/28548
Order Nr 12427/2016, 17/10. Criação do grupo de trabalho interministerial para apresentar uma proposta
de Estratégia Nacional para o Envelhecimento Ativo e Saudável. Diário da República, 2ª Série,
Nº 199, p. 30783 – 30784.
Ordinance Nr 67/2012, 21/03. Condições de Organização, Funcionamento e Instalação das Estruturas
Residenciais para Idosos. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 58, p. 1324 – 1329.
Ordinance Nr 96/2013, 04/03. Condições de Instalação e Funcionamento dos Estabelecimentos de Apoio
Social - Centro de Noite. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 58, p. 1324 – 1329.
Peel, N. M., McClure, R. J., & Bartlett, H. P. (2005, April). Behavioral determinants of healthy aging.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 28(3), 298–304. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2004.12.002
PMID:15766620
Pordata (2023, February, 27th) Óbitos de residentes em Portugal por algumas causas de morte. Pordata.
https://www.pordata.pt/db/portugal/ambiente+de+consulta/tabela
Portugal, Ministry of Health, General Direction of Health. (2021) Programa Nacional para a Prevenção
e Controlo do Tabagismo 2020. Lisboa: Direção Geral da Saúde. https://www.dgs.pt/portal-da-estatisticada-
saude/diretorio-de-informacao/diretorio-de-informacao/por-serie-1219790-pdf.aspx?v=%3d%3dDw
AAAB%2bLCAAAAAAABAArySzItzVUy81MsTU1MDAFAHzFEfkPAAAA
281
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
Portuguesa, R. Serviço Nacional de Saúde (RP, SNS) (2017). Estratégia Nacional para o Envelhecimento
Ativo e Saudável 2017-2025. ANMP. https://www.anmp.pt/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/198a.pdf
Portuguesa, R., & Estrangeiros, N. (2022) Sobre Portugal. Portal Diplomatico. https://portaldiplomatico.
mne.gov.pt/sobre-portugal
Portuguese Social Security. (2021). Idosos. PSS. https://www.seg-social.pt/idosos
Radulovic, M. (2017). The Family in the Transition Process in the Republic of Macedonia. Sociological
Review. http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.12188/1837
Red Cross of Republic of Macedonia. (2017). The Need of Social and Healthcare Services for Elderly
People. The Red Cross. http://inkluzivam.org/wp-content/uploads/2007/12/Izvestaj-MK.pdf
Regulatory Decree Nr 1/2022, 10/01. Estabelece os termos e as condições do reconhecimento do estatuto
do cuidador informal bem como as medidas de apoio aos cuidadores informais e às pessoas cuidadas
. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 6, p. 321 – 36.
Serviço de Intervenção nos Comportamentos Aditivos e nas Dependências (SICAD) (2018). Relatório
Anual - 2018 - A Situação do País em Matéria de Álcool. https://www.sicad.pt/PT/Documents/2019/
relatorio_2018/RelatorioAnual_2018_%20ASituacaoDoPaisEmMateriaDeAlcool.pdf
Serviço Nacional de Saúde (SNS). (2021). Cuidados Continuados. SNS. https://www.sns.gov.pt/snssaude-
mais/cuidados-continuados/
Serviço Nacional de Saúde (SNS); Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde, IP (ACSS) (2019).
Monitorização da Rede Nacional de Cuidados Integrados (RNCCI). ACSS. https://www.acss.min-saude.
pt/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Relatorio_-Monitorizacao_RNCCI-2019.pdf
Sociedade Portuguesa de Diabetologia. (2019). Diabetes: Factos e Números - O Ano de 2016, 2017 e
2018 - Relatório Anual do Observatório Nacional da Diabetes. Sociedade Portuguesa de Diabetologia.
https://www.spd.pt/images/uploads/20210304-200808/DF&N-2019_Final.pdf
State Statistical Office of Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022b) Mortality in the Republic
of North Macedonia. Year LX SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/pdf/2022/2.1.22.24_mk.pdf
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2002a) Census of Population,
Households and Dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia, 2002 – Book XIII. SSORNM. https://www.
stat.gov.mk/pdf/kniga_13.pdf
State Statistical office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022c) Statistical Yearbook
of the Republic of North Macedonia. SSORNM. www.stat.gov.mk
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022d, June 1st) Marriages
and divorces in the Republic of North Macedonia in 2021. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/
pdf/2022/2.1.22.19_mk.pdf
282
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022f) Census 2021 / Вкупно
резидентно население, домаќинства и станови во Република Северна Македонија, попис 2021,
уредник Татјана Ѓорѓиевска. Скопје. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/InfoGraphic/2022/POPIS_
DZS_web_MK.pdf
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022e). Natality in the Republic
of North Macedonia, 2021. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/pdf/2022/2.1.22.23_mk.pdf
The Ethnic Communities’ Council of Victoria (ECCV). (2015) Dignity and ageing in a new culture:
Mutual trust and respect with family, friends and relatives. A Macedonian community education resource
kit for elder abuse prevention. ECCV. https://eccv.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/resource-eLEDERaBUSE-
Macedonian_Community_Education_Kit_on_Elder_Abuse.pdf
TheGlobalEconomy.com. (2022) North Macedonia: Human Flight and brain drain. Global Economy.
https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Macedonia/human_flight_brain_drain_index/
Tinios, P., Valvis, Z., & Georgiadis, T. (2022). Heterogeneity in Long-Term Care for Older Adults in
Europe: Between Individual and Systemic Effects. J. Ageing Longev., 2022(2), 153–177. doi:10.3390/
jal2020014
Turismo de Portugal. (2022). Sobre Portugal. Turismo de Portugal. https://www.visitportugal.com/pt-pt/
sobre-portugal/biportugal
Turismo de Portugal. (2022a). Património Mundial. Turismo de Portugal. https://www.visitportugal.
com/pt-pt/sobre-portugal/biportugal
UNESCO. (2022). Natural and Cultural Heritage of the Ohrid region. WHC. https://whc.unesco.org/
en/list/99/
United Nations (UN). (2022). International migrant stock 2020. UN. https://www.un.org/development/
desa/pd/content/international-migrant-stock
WHO. (2015). Relatório Mundial de Envelhecimento e Saúde. Geneva. World Health Organization
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241565042
WHO. (2017). Integrated Care for older people. Guidelines on community-level interventions to manage
declines in intrinsic capacity. WHO. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/258981
WHO. (2022a). Ageing and Health. Key Facts. WHO. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/ageing-and-health
WHO. (2022b). Ageing. Impact. WHO. https://www.who.int/health-topics/ageing#tab=tab_1
WHO. (2022c). Ageing. Overview. WHO. https://www.who.int/health-topics/ageing#tab=tab_1
World Bank. (2020). Human Capital Project. Word Bank. www.worldbank.org/humancapital
World Health Organization. Regional Office for Europe; European Observatory on Health Systems
and Policies; Simões, J. A.; Augusto, G. F.; Fronteira, I. & Hernandéz-Quevedo, C. ( 2017) . Portugal:
health system review. World Health Organization. Regional Office for Europe. https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/330211
283
Elderly Care in Portugal and North Macedonia
﻿
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019a). Environmental health inequalities in Europe. Second
assessment report. WHO: Regional Office for Europe. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/
item/9789289054157
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019b). World Health Statistics. Overview. Monitoring Health.
WHO: Regional Office for Europe. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/9789289054157
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021). Older people and access to health care in North Macedonia
Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/339644/9789289055420-eng.pdf
World Health Organization (WHO). (2022d). Core health indicators in the WHO European Region:
special focus: 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. WHO. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/
item/WHO-EURO-2020-1887-41638-56893
World Health Organization (WHO). (2022e). WHO European Regional Obesity Report 2022. WHO.
ENDNOTES
1 Functional Capacity - Health-related attributes that enable people to be and to do what they have
reason to value (WHO, 2015).
2 Intrinsic Capacity - The composite of all of the physical, and mental capacities that an individual
can draw on (WHO, 2015).
3 Caregiver - A person who provides care and support to someone else. This may include the following:
helping with self-care, household tasks, mobility, social participation and meaningful
activities; offering information, advice and emotional support as well as engaging in advocacy,
facilitation of decision-making and peer-support, and helping with advance-care planning; offering
respite services; and engaging in activities to foster intrinsic capacity. Caregivers may include
family members, friends, neighbors, volunteers, care workers and health care professionals (WHO,
2017: 44).
284
Copyright © 2023, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 16
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-6684-7630-7.ch016
ABSTRACT
This Chapter aims to contribute to the deepening of scientific knowledge in the area of active and healthy
aging, considering as fundamental the protection and promotion of the rights of the elderly and the
safeguarding of human dignity, with a purpose to their effective implementation. In this perspective,
on the one hand, we recognize that global and universal demographic aging is increasingly active and
participatory in society. On the other hand, we assist in situations of profound vulnerability and risk,
through the phenomenon of violence against the elderly, which implies their detection, prevention, investigation,
and adoption of social policies and legislation.
INTRODUCTION
The phenomenon of population aging is one of the most important challenges of the XXI century, which
advocates the construction of a “society for all ages” (WHO, 2002), in which safety is one of the pillars
of active and healthy aging.
Actually, in the world, medical developments and the progressive generalized improvement of living
conditions, particularly in industrialized countries, have resulted in an increase in the aging of the
population and in the longevity of citizens, which constitute new and demanding challenges for societies.
Currently, violence against the elderly is a global phenomenon, which constitutes a serious social
and public health problem, with a growing trend, so their protection is fundamental through the defense
and promotion of their rights to promote the effective safeguard of human dignity.
The year 2012 was designated the “European Year of Active Aging and Solidarity between Generations”,
which promoted a positive approach to aging through the creation of spaces and times for
Challenges From Protecting
the Elderly to Promoting
Active and Healthy Aging
Carmen Macedo
University of Algarve, Portugal
285
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
reflective debate and the emergence of proactive initiatives, allowing the development and appreciation
of the senior population.
The National Strategy for Active and Healthy Aging, 2017-2025 (ENEAS), defined as objectives
the promotion of the health and well-being of the elderly, and also the recognition of the fact that the
benefits and importance of active aging and health throughout the life cycle require the implementation
of intersectoral policies (2002), and concerted action through integrated governance, to improve
people’s opportunities and quality of life with advancing age and ensuring the sustainability of their
support systems (WHO, 2012).
The General Assembly of the United Nations has declared 2021-2030 the United Nations Decade for
Healthy Aging, with the goals of reducing the number of abused older people worldwide, and contributing
to improving their health, well-being, and dignity, through the implementation of five priorities
to prevent abuse against the elderly. Accordingly, considered combating ageism, generating more and
better data on prevalence and on risk and protective factors, developing and expanding solutions to economic
difficulties, promoting investments to address the issue, and making funds available to combat
the problem (WHO, 2022c).
Individual aging it´s defined as a progressive process of biopsychosocial change in the person throughout
the life cycle, conditioned by biological, social, economic, cultural, environmental, and historical
factors (WHO, 1999; 2015). This is an achievement, both for individuals and for societies, resulting from
economic, social, and biomedical progress, proving to be essential to analyze the challenges that emerge
and the adaptation needs of societies (Cabral, Ferreira, Silva, Jerónimo, & Marques, 2013).
In effect, aging contributes to the increase of acute and chronic diseases, with several chronic diseases
coexisting in the elderly (Pinto, 2021), including the need to accommodate physical changes, functional
limitations, and other changes in psychological and social functioning, although there are individual
differences in the onset, course, and extent of these changes (OPP, 2022).
The promotion of active and healthy aging along the life cycle has been mention as a response to the
challenges associated with longevity and the aging of the population (Pinto, 2021; WHO, 1999, 2002,
2012, 2015). The elderly population is highly diverse, and the aging process is quite heterogeneous. In
this sense, Simões (2006) refers that at no other age do differences assume such a significant expression
as in the last stage of life.
Development at the end of life is simultaneously characterized by stability and change (Baltes, 1997),
with many older adults successfully adapting to changes and continuing to show personal and interpersonal
development (Hill, 2005). Approaching the elderly implies considering their health condition,
which constitutes one of the fundamental aspects of general well-being and, therefore, one of the aspects
to be taken into account in any intervention, which aims for successful aging (Paúl & Fonseca, 2001).
The World Health Organization defines health as “a state of complete physical, mental and social
well-being and not merely the absence of disease”. In this perspective, for successful active aging, the
promotion of social relationships and mental health is equally important as the promotion of physical
health (WHO, 1999).
According to the Ottawa Charter “Health promotion works through concrete and effective community
action in setting priorities, making decisions, planning strategies and implementing them to achieve better
health. At the heart of this process is the empowerment of communities - their ownership and control
of their endeavors and destinies. (...) This requires full and continuous access to information, learning
opportunities for health, as well as funding support” (WHO, 1986).
286
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
In this sense, the development of health literacy levels in the population proves to be strategic and
fundamental, as a way of promoting health and optimizing the quality of life and well-being of the
population. Promoting health literacy has shown positive effects on the resilience of individuals and
communities, reducing health inequalities and improving overall health and well-being (SNS, 2017).
Active and healthy aging can be defined as the process of optimizing opportunities for health, participation,
and security to improve the quality of life during aging, as well as the process of developing
and maintaining functional capacity, which contributes to the well-being of elderly, functional capacity
being the result of the interaction of the person’s intrinsic capacities (physical and mental) with the
environment (WHO, 2002).
In these terms, quality of life is the fundamental aspect of active aging (Cabral et al., 2013), defined
as a broad concept that is affected in a complex way by physical health, psychological state, level of
independence, person’s social relationships, and the relationship with the characteristics of the respective
environment (WHO, 1997). Some studies show that quality of life, well-being, and maintenance
of mental qualities are related to social activity, socializing, and feelings integrated and valuable in the
family and community (Carvalho & Dias, 2011).
The perspective of active aging is based on the recognition of the rights and principles established
by the United Nations for the elderly, including independence, participation, dignity, care, and selfrealization
(WHO, 2002).
The Aging Population in Portugal
The phenomenon of demographic aging, recognized through reports and officially available statistical
indicators, at an international and national level, constitutes a global, universal, and emerging reality
in societies.
Portugal is one of the most aged countries in Europe. In 2022, more than a fifth (21.1%) of the population
of the European Union was 65 years old or older, and it can be seen that in the total population,
Italy (23.8%), Portugal (23.7%), Finland (23.1%), Greece (22.7%) and Croatia (22.5%) had the highest
percentages of elderly (Eurostat, 2023).
According to the Definitive Results of the XVI General Population Census (INE, 2022), abbreviated to
Census 2021, the resident population in Portugal is 10 343 066 individuals, of which 4 920 220 (47.6%)
are men and 5 422 846 (52.4%) are women. There was a decrease of 2.1% in the resident population
compared to 2011, highlighting a reversal of its growth.
Thus, the age composition of a country refers to the proportional number of children, young people,
adults, and elderly, and the aging of a population is related to a reduction in the number of children and
young people and an increase in the proportion of people aged 60 years and over or more (WHO, 2022).
In Portugal, the elderly are when their age level reaches 65 years of age or more (SNS, 2017).
In 2021, the total resident population aged 65 and over is 2 423 639, an increase of 20.6% compared
to 2011, which had 2 010 064 people. In the last decade, there has been a decrease in the population at
younger ages to the detriment of an increase in the elderly population. In 2021, there was an increase in
the aging index1 of 182 elderly per 100 young people, a value that in 2011 reached 128 per 100 young
people (INE, 2022).
On the other hand, in Portugal, life expectancy at birth was 79.8 in 2011, having evolved to 80.7 in
2020. Currently, life expectancy for men is 77.7 years, while for women it stands at 83.4 years (PORDATA,
2022), with the number of women higher than that of men, reflecting the higher levels of mortality in
287
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
the male population (INE, 2022). According to available data, life expectancy at age 65 in 2020 was
17.4% for men and 20.8% for women (PORDATA, 2022).
Portugal recorded, in 2021, a longevity index of 29.4%, which stood at 14.5% (1960). Given the
characteristics of the evolution of the longevity of the elderly population, there has been an increase in
the elderly dependency index which, in 2021, rose to 36.1% compared to 2.6% recorded in 1960 (PORDATA,
2023).
Resident population projections between 2018 and 2080, estimate that Portugal will lose population,
the number of young people and births will decrease, with an increase in the number of elderly
(65 and over), and the aging index will almost double, passing from 159 to 300 elderly for every 100
young people. In 2080, it will tend to stabilize by 2050, highlighting, however, an increasingly aging
population (INE, 2020)2.
Violence Against the Elderly: An International and National Reality
The World Health Organization estimates that in 2021, 16% of the elderly will have been victims of abuse
(WHO, 2022a), and one in six people aged 60 or over annually experience abuse in the community, with
only 4% of cases having been reported (WHO, 2022b).
Europe and Portugal have a higher prevalence of violence against the elderly of a psychological nature
(10%; 6%) and financial (3% and 6%), followed by both physical (2%), sexual (1%), and negligence
/1%), respectively (WHO, 2022a).
According to the annual report of the Portuguese Association for Victim Support (APAV, 2021), a
reference institution in Portugal that provides support to victims, the national results record a total of
1594 victims of the elderly. This report contains the phenomenon of violence against children and young
people, in a total universe of 1959 victims, which in comparison with the elderly is very similar, which
highlights the risk between both.
The profile of the victim of elderly is female (70%), with an average age of 76 years, with a low
education degree (5.8%) and higher education (2.9%). Family relationships were significant, reflected
in the relationship with the perpetrator of the crime, father or mother (26.2%), and spouse (16.5%).
Concerning the perpetrator of the crime, APAV registered in 2021, the highest number of males
(60.9%), maintaining the trend of previous years, which demonstrated that men are the main aggressors.
In 2021, the number of elderly, over 65 years of age, who came to the knowledge of APAV represented
4.2% of the records, maintaining the trend of recent years, given that in 2020, it represented 4, 8% and,
in 2019, 4.5% of cases.
Relationships between perpetrator and victim of crime are generally guided by intimate relationships,
conjugality (15.5%), and relationships between partners (8.5%), with family relationships of consanguinity,
also showing significance, in cases where the victim is the child of the author of the crime (7.8%),
followed by 6.4%, in which the victim is the father or mother of the author.
In the characterization of victimization, the most referenced crime scene was the common residence
(49.4%), between the victim and the perpetrator of the crime, followed by the victim’s residence (15.9%)
(APAV, 2021).
In Portugal, the National Republican Guard (GNR) created the first edition of the “Senior Census”
operation, in 2011, with the principal objective, in terms of crime prevention, through georeferencing
and surveying the number of elderly living in isolation and or in situations of isolation (Ramos, 2020),
288
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
referring the situations of greater vulnerability to the competent authorities, with intervention in the
social area, to monitor them.
The GNR, signaled in 2022, 44 511 elderly, who live alone and or isolated, or in a vulnerable situation,
due to their physical, psychological, or other condition that may jeopardize their safety. In the last
decade, we have witnessed a growing trend of signaling the elderly expressed by data recorded since
2011, the year in which 15,596 elderly were registered.
In Portugal, the study carried out by the National Institute of Health Doutor Ricardo Jorge (2014),
on the prevalence of violence against the elderly, showed that 12.3% of the population over 60 years of
age was the victim of at least one episode of violence over one year.
Statistics from the security forces found that the phenomenon of violence against the elderly has
registered a significant increase in participation, which may reflect a greater awareness of society in
the promotion and defense of the rights of the elderly, due to the increase in the aging of the population
or by an increase in public services and institutions with intervention in the social area (Ramalho &
Ramalho, 2014).
In line with national statistics, globally, the results pointed to a prevalence of female and male victimization
identical to that found internationally, which showed that the female population has a higher
risk of abuse (DGS, 2016).
Some studies indicate that almost 90% of abusers are family members (Wilber & McNeilly, 2001),
including the other spouse and children. In this sense, it is noted that is difficult for victims not to denounce
the aggressors, which is usually due to the existence of a family connection, fear of reprisals,
and social stigma (Oliveira, 2008), which leads to silence or withdrawal of the complaint, resulting in
the archiving of the processes.
Legal Framework for the Protection of the Elderly
The legal framework in force in Portugal about the protection of the elderly has been showing, in the last
decade, through a set of guiding diplomas, a growing concern to avoid risky situations against the elderly.
The Constitution of the Portuguese Republic declares in articles 1 and 13 that Portugal is a Republic
based on the dignity of the human person and committed to building a free, fair, and solidary society,
ensuring that all citizens have the same social dignity and are equal before the law.
Following the provisions of articles 67 and 72, the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic recognizes
the family as a fundamental element of society, assigns to society and the State the duty to protect the
family, in particular, concerning refers to “third age” which determines that “elderly have the right to
economic security and housing conditions and family and community living that respect their autonomy
and avoid and overcome isolation or social marginalization” taking into account to provide older people
with opportunities for personal fulfillment through active participation in community life.
In Portugal, as in most European legal systems, the Legal-Criminal Framework, the protection of the
elderly does not have a specific regulatory framework. However, the legislator intended to safeguard and
protect cases of vulnerability or abandonment, within the scope of the concept of “a person particularly
helpless due to age”, embodied in several articles of the Penal Code (CP) and the provisions of Decree-
Law n.º 48/95, of March 15 (Branco, 2018; Mendes & Xavier, 2017), also recognized by the global
status report on violence prevention (WHO, 2014).
In article 67.º-A of Law nº 130/2015, of September 4, on victims of crimes, the concept of “especially
vulnerable victim”, to be applied in certain circumstances (age, state of health, etc.), allows verifying
289
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
that the protection guaranteed to children and young people in danger by Law n.º 147/99, of September
1st, has no correspondence in adults. A reference also mentioned in the WHO report (WHO, 2014).
The Resolution of the Council of Ministers, n.º 63/2015, defines the Elderly Protection Strategy and
recognizes that advanced age presents specificities in terms of health care, social support, and family
environment, as well as legal protection, which must be effectively regulated, to guarantee respect for
the dignity of the human person at all stages of life. It also refers that, within the scope of the right to
dignity, the elderly must be able to live with dignity and security, without being physically or psychologically
exploited, and be treated fairly. Also stating that elderly citizens are often expose to practices that
violate their most basic rights, whose defense must ensure and guarantee their adequate and proportional
legal protection.
In August 2018, Law n.º 49/2018, approved the Regime of the Greater Accompanied. We are witnessing
a paradigm shift, which put an end to the interdiction and disqualification processes, allowing any
person who, for reasons of health, disability, or behavior, is unable to personally and consciously, exercise
their rights or fulfilling his duties, may apply to the Court for the necessary accompanying measures.
The law n.º 100/2019, of September 6, approved the Statute of the Informal Caregiver, which regulates
the rights and duties of the caregiver and the person cared for, as well as establishing the respective support
measures. More recently, Regulatory Decree n.º 1/2022, of January 10, highlights the simplification
of the process of recognition of the informal caregiver status, the expansion of the recognition of care
provided to more than one family member, and the caregiver’s rest informal to the National Network of
Continuing Integrated Mental Health Care.
Although society has progressively recognized a broader set of rights for the elderly, the legal-criminal
framework of violence against the elderly in Portugal does not seem to be sufficient for the protection
of elderly people at risk.
In this perspective, it is essential to protect and promote their rights, through the creation of proximity
institutions, as suggested by some public prosecutors and professionals, or adapting the scope of action
to any people in a situation of risk similar to the existing Commissions for the Protection of Children
and Young People (Mendes & Xavier, 2017).
Thus, prevention as a fundamental element to avoid the various forms of violence against the elderly
assumes an extreme relevance, which is why the diagnosis of situations, identification of risk and protector
factors, combined with an adequate and effective intervention is essential to your success.
Violence Against the Elderly: Definition of Concepts
Violence against the elderly is a global public health and human rights problem, with implications for
individuals and society in general. In the literature, we can identify several terms used to define the concept
of violence against the elderly, namely, mistreatment, abuse, neglect, and abandonment, among others.
The WHO (2002), in the Toronto Declaration, defines the concept of elder abuse as “A single or
repeated act, or lack of adequate action, that occurs within the framework of any relationship where
there is an expectation of trust, that causes harm or distress to an older person”. The United Nations, in
2002, defines violence as any act of a violent nature that implies or has the risk of implying, physical,
sexual, or psychological harm, which may be threats, negligence, exploitation, embarrassment, arbitrary
deprivation of liberty of public and private life.
The World Assembly on Aging in 2002, similarly to the WHO, also defines the concept as “Any act,
single or repeated, or lack of appropriate action that occurs in any relationship, purported to be trusted,
290
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
that causes harm or distress, to an elderly person” (WHO, 2002). In addition to the concept of violence,
in the literature, there are also concepts of abuse and mistreatment against the elderly.
The WHO (2022a), defines the concept of abuse as “the intentional or unintentional action or omission,
which results in unnecessary suffering, injury, pain, loss or violation of human rights and consequently
a decrease in the quality of life” of the elderly. In the Toronto Declaration (2002), the WHO defines the
concept of elder abuse “as any isolated or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, that occurs in any
relationship where there is an expectation of trust and that causes harm, or uncomfortable for the elderly.
The WHO (2002) distinguishes five main forms of violence against the elderly, including, a) physical
violence defined as a set of actions carried out with the intention of causing physical pain or injury to
the elderly (physical punishment, pushing, throwing of objects and the act of under or over medicating);
b) emotional and/or verbal psychological violence, which includes all actions that cause suffering,
distress, anguish, through verbal or non-verbal forms (threats, intimidation, manipulation, among others);
c) sexual violence that consists of the involvement of the elderly in sexual acts without consent or
without understanding its meaning (rape, sexual harassment); d) economic and financial violence, which
involves the legal or inappropriate use, by formal and informal caregivers, of assets, funds or properties
of the elderly person (theft, sale of properties or transfer of money without the victim’s authorization),
and e) Negligence, which implies omission, refusal or insufficiency in the provision of care, obligations
or duties towards the elderly person (omission or refusal of food, health care, hygiene, material support,
emotional support).
In terms of intentionality, negligence can also be divided into two types, active, in which the aggressor
denies care and acts intentionally in non-compliance, and passive, which differs from the first in that it
is not conscious or intentional (Branco, 2018; Dias, 2004). Given the above, violence against the elderly
occurs through various forms of violence that may or may not coexist (APAV, 2023).
Stressful and Risk Life Events
Throughout the life cycle, multiple life events give rise to situations of imbalance with important repercussions
on the level of personal and family functioning, which imply necessary changes, to allow
individuals and families to adapt to new requirements.
The literature has come to consider risk factors as aspects that are related to stressful or negative
life events, whose implications may accentuate or increase the appearance of problems at a physical,
psychological, and social level, susceptible to compromising the balanced psychosocial development of
individuals (Yunes, 2003; Rutter, 1987). As opposed to risk and vulnerability factors, others may coexist,
called protectors, whose influence may contribute to the reduction or suppression of the negative
influences of exposure to risk (Rutter, 1987).
Based on the literature review, stressful and risky life events have been consider based on two theoretical
perspectives, whose approach focuses on the quantitative and qualitative point of view, to understand
the incidence and implication of risk and protection factors in individual and family development.
According to Rutter (2005), two or more stressor aspects are necessary to have a significant impact
on the healthy development of the individual, assuming that for a better understanding, their analysis
should proceed on a continuum.
Therefore, despite the existence of numerous risk factors, their impact on the individual depends
on the characteristics of the individual and their subjective view of these factors, the characteristics of
these factors, and the interaction established between both aspects (Rutter, 1987). The occurrence of
291
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
several risk factors simultaneously leads to poor results in several developmental indicators, including
psychosocial competence, psychopathology, and health (Masten & Wright, 1998).
Risk and Protection Factors
The contextualization of lack of protection implies, on the one hand, considering the risk factors and,
on the other hand, identifying the protective factors and the contextual factors, which protect and promote
the personal and social resources of individuals, can contribute to the interruption of the cycle of
vulnerability (Nunes, Lemos, Costa, Nunes, & Almeida, 2011).
In this sense, risk factors are variables that increase the probability of a dysfunctional or pathological
result occurring in an individual or group, which compromises to a greater or lesser extent the psychosocial
adaptation of individuals (Rodrigo, Máiquez, Martín, & Byrne, 2008). Risk factors are variables
that increase the probability of a negative result occurring in the future (Deković, 1999).
About risk factors, we can also identify some factors that establish an important relationship with
these, defined vulnerability factors, which refer to those personal or relational factors that increase the
probability of the negative effects of risk situations (Luthar, 2006), which is the same context, do not
have this amplifying effect when the risk is not present, which explains why individuals in these circumstances
have greater difficulties in psychosocial adaptation (Lorence, 2008).
In turn, the decrease or elimination of the negative influences of risk exposure is called protection
(Sapienza & Pedremônico, 2005). Protective factors only act in the presence of risk and can be defined
as those influences that modify an individual’s response in the presence of risk situations, leading to a
more positive result than would be expected (Rodrigo et al., 2008).
Accordingly, the risk and protection factors, as well as the system’s available resources, can vary and
modify the situation of families in a continuum (Rodrigo et al., 2008), and the interactions they establish
with each other support, qualify or change the experience of families (Minuchin, 2005).
CONCEPTUALIZATION OF SOCIAL SUPPORT
Social support has been raising a deep interest and occupying a privileged place in the scientific community,
due to the relevance of the role and function it represents, as a multidimensional construct
(Ribeiro, 1999).
Lin and Ensel (1989) define social support as the process through which the social resources made
available by formal and informal support networks make it possible to satisfy the instrumental and expressive
needs of individuals in their daily lives and crises. López et al. (2007) consider social support as a
dynamic and transactional process, whose complexity refers to a mutual influence between individuals
and their support networks, to promote physical and psychological well-being.
In the literature, we can also identify the benefits of the role of social support in the health and
well-being of individuals, including a lower incidence of physical and mental illnesses, a more positive
adjustment to chronic illnesses, a reduction in stress, as well as other positive benefits for physical and
psychological health (Skok, Harvey, & Reddihough, 2006).
Social support is considered by several experts as a factor capable of protecting and promoting health
(Siqueira, 2008), has been recognized for its influence on the health and psychological well-being of
292
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
individuals (López & Sánchez, 2001; Thoits, 1982), and reducing the negative impact of negative life
events (Nunes, Lemos, Ayala-Nunes, & Costa, 2013).
In general, social support can be assessed by the individual’s social integration in their environment,
a network of services and people that are accessible to them (e.g., health services), and the individual’s
perception of people and services in the community (Baptista, Baptista, & Torres, 2006). Integration
and social support are essential for the elderly, providing them with emotional and practical resources,
active participation, and greater self-esteem, given that more integrated people tend to enjoy better
health (SNS, 2017).
In the literature we can identify a distinction defended about the typology of social support, distinguishing
between emotional social support (affection), instrumental (tangible goods and services), informative
(access to information and guidance/counseling), and evaluation (Langford, Bowsher, Maloney,
& Lillis,1997; Semmer, Elfering, Jacobshagen, & Perrot, 2008).
Social support, in addition to constituting a theoretical construction, must be considered in the light
of a dynamic and complex process, which integrates reciprocal interactions between individuals, to
satisfy their social needs, promote and developing of personal resources, deal with new demands, and
challenges achieve new goals.
Family and Social Support Networks
The family constitutes nuclear and fundamental support for all its members who usually resort to a wide
range of sources of help that provide support for their functioning and routines of daily life (López,
2006), so any family needs a broad and effective social support network (Gómez, Pérez, & Vila, 2001).
The concept of a social network refers to a process of continuous, individual, and collective construction,
which is characterized by an open system of sharing that establishes multiple relationships between
the elements of a group (e.g., family, community, governmental and non-governmental organizations)
with other groups, whose exchange enriches and enhances personal and social resources. Thus, social
networks constitute groups capable of providing support, through which psychological and material
resources are promoted, which allow individuals to respond more adaptively to potentially complex and
demanding real situations.
Social support networks have been associated with numerous protective factors of crucial importance
(Rodrigo et al., 2008), which include two specific types of social support networks or sources, formal
and informal.
Informal support networks are part of the natural network of individuals, consisting of family members,
neighbors, and friends, among others, and also social groups, such as voluntary organizations, and
clubs, capable of providing resources and support in activities of daily living, in the presence of various
normative and non-normative life events.
In turn, formal social support networks involve formal social institutions, public or private, such as
hospitals, health services, social security services, and professionals, namely doctors, psychologists, and
social workers, among others, organized to promote and provide support and assistance, with emphasis
on the provision of goods and services or financial support, to all those who need it (Ribeiro, 1999).
In general, people tend to resort first to informal support networks, which are closer (Sousa & Rodrigues,
2009), either because they embody more natural, reciprocal, and satisfactory sources of support, either
because of their more private character and adapted to the specific needs of people (Rodrigo et al., 2008).
293
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Social support, more specifically, family support is associated with a low prevalence of anxiety and
mood disorders in individuals (Baptista, 2005). In turn, the inclusion of support in the living environment
of an older adult implies balancing the need for autonomy and quality of life with security (OPP, 2022).
The presence of multiple forms of formal support can interfere with families’ daily lives, reducing
their sense of privacy and promoting the loss of responsibility for their own lives (Rodrigo, Martín,
Máiquez, & Rodríguez, 2007). In this sense, interventions at the level of social support, in particular
those that try to create new support providers, challenge the limits of our knowledge (Barrera, 1991).
Therefore, the necessary efforts must be made, to expand and strengthen their informal social support
networks, combining them with the support of the formal network, which unequivocally constitutes a
challenge in the intervention with the elderly in a situation of vulnerability and risk.
Violence Against the Elderly and Its Implications
The family constitutes the privileged context of the human person, in particular, of the elderly. In this
perspective, the family, the community, and society have a strong impact on the way we age (Cabral et
al., 2013), with implications on the quality of life of the elderly, which depends on the risks and opportunities
experienced throughout the life cycle and how the following generations provide mutual help
and support (WHO, 2002).
In most countries, care provided by the family is the predominant model of support, however, family
members often experience high levels of stress and health problems, both physical and psychological,
for which they need training and support to deal with the situation (DGS, 2017). The reduction in the
proportion of young adults available with the capacity to provide the necessary care for the elderly can
make this model of care provision unfeasible, making its adequacy and the implementation of other
models a determining factor (WHO, 2012).
Living longer implies greater exposure to risks, such as vulnerability to health status, physical, mental,
and economic dependence, stigmatization, social isolation, and loneliness (Cabral et al., 2013), and
abuse, whether physical, psychological, sexual, financial or material, due to discrimination or negligence
(United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2013).
WHO (2002) estimates that the demographic increase in the elderly will aggravate situations of
violence and mistreatment, due to the rupture of family ties, and the reduction and ineffectiveness of
social protection systems. Accordingly, it is crucial to guarantee elderly people a social and economic
support system that mitigates vulnerabilities, especially in situations of poverty and material deprivation
(DGS, 2017).
The elderly often have concomitant mental and physical health problems. Although most people
are in good mental health, cognitive disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease, are frequently observed
among the senior population. Changes in the functional capacity of the elderly can cause emotional
stress, both in individuals and in family members involved in care (Schulz & Martire, 2004). Functional
dependence or physical disability in the elderly has been consistently associated with an increased risk
of elder abuse, including physical, emotional, and financial abuse (Burnes et al., 2015).
Among the elderly who use health services, depressive and anxiety disorders are common, as well
as adaptation disorders and problems arising from the incorrect use of prescribed medications (Gum,
King-Kallimanis, & Kohn 2009). On the other hand, older adults with severe mental illness present
special assessment and intervention challenges, in part due to the reduced social support they face,
which can result in inadequate hospitalization in healthcare institutions (Harvey, 2005). The change in
294
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
the environment of the elderly is generally experienced as a threat to their safety and integrity (Cardoso
and Costa, 2006).
In the literature, we can identify several risk factors associated with the phenomenon of violence
against the elderly, such as the increase in demographic aging and situations of dependence (Gil, Fernandes,
Nicolau, & Santos, 2013). The elderly are at greater risk of being abused, with women being
more likely than men (Gil et al., 2015), and low incomes have been associated with emotional and
physical abuse (Burnes et al., 2015).
On the other hand, transgenerational transmission, that is, individuals who would have grown up in
unfavorable and violent environments (Branco, 2018), intergenerational violence, which may depend on
the characteristics of caregivers and care (alcoholism, drugs, mental disorders, economic difficulties)
(Oliveira, 2008), also emerge as factors that may be at the origin of violence.
In addition to these, caregiver stress and psychological health problems (Cooney, Haward, & Lawlor,
2006; Vandeweerd, Paveza, & Fulmer, 2006), depression, anxiety, and frustration (Gallagher-Thompson
et al., 2003), are common among aggressors and perpetrators of abuse against the elderly (WHO, 2011).
Caregiver depression is a predictor of physical (Coyne et al., 1993), and verbal abuse (Vandeweerd et
al., 2006), and abusers are more likely to experience psychiatric hospitalization than non-abusers (Pillemer
& Finkelhor, 1988).
Some studies have also demonstrated that aggressors often depend on victims for emotional support,
financial help, housing, and or other assistance (WHO, 2011). In the literature, the most common type
of relationship between the perpetrator of emotional and physical abuse of the elderly is the spouse or
partner (Burnes et al., 2015; Pillemer & Finkelhor, 1988), and the financial dependence of spouses and
children (Branco, 2008).
In addition to the characteristics of the victim, the perpetrator, and the relationship between victim
and perpetrator, community contexts may also place some individuals at greater risk of abuse (Pillemer,
Burnes, Riffin, & Lachs 2016). Older people living in urban areas are at greater risk of suffering abuse
(Brozowski & Hall 2010), as well as a decrease in social participation, loss of self-esteem, and social
isolation can contribute to the increase in the occurrence of abuse under the most diverse forms (WHO,
2012).
Accordingly, low social support is considered a dimension likely to increase the risk of violence against
the elderly (Alves & Serrão, 2018). The elderly residing in rural areas often have difficulty accessing
aging-related resources (e.g., transportation, community centers, and meal programs) and may experience
low levels of social support and high levels of isolation (Guralnick, Kemele, Stamm, & Greving, 2003).
At the end of life, suicide is a reality, which deserves special concern on the part of helping professionals,
assessing the risk of suicide among the elderly. In several countries, the suicide rate is higher
in old age, with suicide rates among the elderly being among the highest observed for any age group
(Kochanek., Xu, Murphy, Miniño, & Kung, 2012), and attempts are usually more lethal (Oliveira, J.
2008). Attitudes of segregation and stereotypes that persist to the final period of the life cycle defined
as ageism, call into question solidarity and social cohesion, indispensable factors for social justice, the
well-being of individuals, and the health of communities (DGS, 2016). In this sense, suicide in the elderly
can be approached from different perspectives, including, ageism, stereotypes, or prejudices that
lead to discrimination against people because they are old (Oliveira, 2008).
Accordingly, preventive efforts should be developed aimed at the older population, suicide prevention,
at the level of primary health care (Bruce et al., 2004), through better recognition and diagnosis
295
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
of depressive symptoms, among other, risk factors (Huh et al. 2012), and their referral for appropriate
treatment (Pearson & Brown, 2000).
The elderly can be perceived as fragile, dependent, or burdensome, and negative attitudes and stereotypes
may contribute to the social acceptance of abuse (Nelson, 2005; WHO, 2011). In addition to
the need to change negative stereotypes, by promoting a positive image of the elderly, it is necessary to
ensure the safety of those who are exposed to this type of risk (DGS, 2017).
The literature has shown that the lack of social support is positively related to suicide (Minayo &
Cavalante, 2010), and the treatment of depressive symptoms among older primary care patients reduces
suicidal ideation (Bruce et al., 2004).
In addition to isolation, depression, mental and physical health, in which aggressions imply physical
integrity or health is neglected by caregivers, often when the elderly is already weakened by illnesses
(Oliveira, 2008), abuse of the elderly can lead to serious physical injuries and long-term psychological
consequences, increased risk of institutionalization, use of emergency services, hospitalization and
premature death (WHO, 2022b). These situations, when undetected, severely compromise the victims’
quality of life and their survival time (DGS, 2016).
Strategies to prevent and combat situations of violence against the elderly are particularly relevant,
which may include, awareness campaigns, mandatory reporting of abuse to the authorities, detection of
possible victims and aggressors, intergenerational programs in schools, policies to support structures
of residential care for seniors, and caregiver support interventions (Branco, 2018). Interventions when
specifically for abusive caregivers can help prevent revictimization (Reay & Browne, 2002).
On the other hand, money management (Sacks, Romanick, Caron, Morano, & Fahs, 2012; WHO,
2022b), telephone support lines (Pillemer, Burnes, Riffin, & Lachs, 2016), shelters and emergency houses
(Moracco & Cole, 2009; WHO, 2022b), providing security, to allow the implementation of a plan of
successful safety (Heck & Gillespie, 2013) can contribute to reducing elder abuse.
Finally, the intervention of multidisciplinary teams and interdisciplinary collaboration (WHO, 2022b),
require coordination of available services (Pillemer, et al., 2016), which are intended to be integrated,
in continuity and proximity, essential in the care of the elderly person, guaranteeing the efficiency and
sustainability of the available resources.
In this sense, the success of interventions and responses implies the involvement and intervention of
the various systems, including health care, mental health care, the social area, protection services, and
criminal justice, with a view to their effective protection, removal of situations of risk and vulnerability,
promoting their rights and safeguarding human dignity.
CONCLUSION
The growing recognition of the phenomenon of violence against the elderly has been considered by
organizations, at international, national, and local levels, as a serious violation of human rights and one
of the greatest public and social health challenges of the XXI century, which have been constituting a
concern in their priorities and policies.
Aging constitutes a victory for socioeconomic development and public health, which together implies
the challenge of adapting to society (WHO, 2015), given that the impact of population aging on society
will also depend on the nature of the policies aimed at this new reality (WHO, 2012).
296
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
The promotion and continuity of the development of transversal policies and multidisciplinary,
flexible, and proximity action strategies are fundamental, to allowing all elderly to enjoy an active and
healthy life (SNS, 2017). Accordingly, local government has played a fundamental role by promoting
partnerships, mobilizing resources, and developing action programs in the field of protecting the elderly
and promoting active and healthy aging.
The WHO, in 2010, created the Global Network of Age-Friendly Cities and Communities to connect
cities, communities, and organizations around the world with a common vision of making communities a
great place to age. This network operates at the local level, promoting the full participation of the elderly
in community life, through policies, services, and support structures, which promote active aging and
recognize the capabilities and resources of older people, responding flexibly to their needs and protecting
the most vulnerable by promoting their inclusion and contribution in all aspects of community life.
The Order of Portuguese Psychologists (OPP), in 2019, promoted a national initiative, through the
attribution of a “Pro-Aging Communities” seal, in recognition of the implementation and adoption of
policies, programs, projects, and good practices, which demonstrate serious and effective commitment
to the promotion of active and healthy aging.
If, on the one hand, the studies carried out to date have enabled the recognition of some of the determinants
and patterns of active and healthy aging, the identification of barriers to its achievement, the
development of successful strategies for its promotion and the dissemination of good practices adopted in
different contexts, require investment in research in a systematic, organized and oriented way (SNS, 2017).
In recent decades, scientific evidence has contributed to the deepening of knowledge and violence
prevention strategies, which include interventions at individual, interpersonal (close relationships), community,
and social levels (WHO, 2022a).
The elderly are often exposed to practices that violate their most basic rights, so it would be desirable
to delineate a global and homogeneous regime, which enshrines legal protection solutions that respect
their dignity.
The protection of the elderly has been a national concern, materializing in many municipalities,
through the constitution of Protection Commissions for the Elderly or working groups created within
the scope of the social network that emerged intending to protect and promote the rights of the elderly,
to guarantee their well-being, physical and mental integrity. These commissions and working groups
intervene exclusively at the local level, exercising their competence in the respective territorial area, with
their regulations, and with no specific and standardized legal framework at the national level.
The progressive rise of social and political awareness, concerning the need to intervene effectively
in the face of the problem of violence against the elderly, arises the need to create a Protection Law
and a National Commission for the Promotion of the Rights and Protection of Elderly, similarly to the
legal framework regarding children and young people in risk, with the appropriate and respective legal
framework.
The signaling and contextualization of each case, in particular, are fundamental, to allow institutions
and professionals to identify and evaluate the processes of vulnerability and risk situations, which allows
making a diagnosis and planning intervention strategies appropriate, to reverse risk situations and
promote the defense and protection of the rights of the elderly.
Institutional articulation and interdisciplinary collaboration, which require the involvement of the
social, health, education, security, and justice sectors, are fundamental and can contribute to reducing
abuse of the elderly people.
297
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
In this sense, the necessary efforts must be made, to expand and strengthen their informal social support
networks, combining them with the support of the formal network, which unequivocally constitutes
a challenge in the intervention aimed at the elderly population in situations of risk and vulnerability.
In recent years, we have witnessed an evident concern on the part of services and recognition of the
importance of professionals in terms of social support structures. Continuous and direct contact with
situations of violence and victims of crime is one of the most specific, demanding, and challenging experiences
that professionals from the most diverse areas and functions can experience (Manita, Ribeiro
& Peixoto, 2009). Accordingly, professionals must be informed about the applicable legal framework
and existing resources in the local community, applying their scientific knowledge in promoting active,
healthy, and successful aging.
The articulation between the different institutions and the Public Ministry is also a fundamental
priority, so that the final decision on the objective in question obtains a satisfactory result, for the protection,
and promotion of the rights and dignity of the elderly, in their capacity as the main actor of any
assessment, inquiry or investigation.
The effective protection of the elderly constitutes the appropriate response to their needs, emerging
the need to deepen scientific knowledge, both in terms of preventing situations of violence, and in
adapting the intervention by helping professionals, through the standardization and harmonization of
procedures, which allow the promotion of good treatment.
In face of the growing trend, diversity, and complexity of the phenomenon of violence against the
elderly, there is an increasing demand for the development of systematic, rigorous, and scientifically
supported psychosocial interventions, which promote the desired effectiveness, with a view to their
protection and effective promotion of aging healthy and active.
REFERENCES
Alves, C., & Serrão, C. (2018). Risk factors for the occurrence of violence against the elderly: A systematic
review. Pan American Journal of Aging Research, 6(2), 58–71. doi:10.15448/2357-9641.2018.2.29964
APAV. (2021). Estatísticas APAV Relatório Anual 2021. Consultado a 10 de fevereiro de 2023. APAV.
https://apav.pt/apav_v3/images/press/Relatorio_Anual_2021.pdf
APAV. (2023). Tipos de Violência. APAV. https://apav.pt/vd/index.php/features2
Baptista, M. N. (2005). Desenvolvimento do inventário de percepção de suporte familiar (IPSF): Estudos
psicométricos preliminares. Psico-USF, 10(1), 11–19. doi:10.1590/S1413-82712005000100003
Baptista, M. N., Baptista, A. S. D., & Torres, E. C. R. (2006). Associação entre suporte social, depressão
e ansiedade em gestantes. Revista de Psicologia da Vetor Editora, 7(1), 39–48.
Barrera, J. M. Jr. (1991). Social Support Interventions and the Third Law of Ecology. American Journal
of Community Psychology, 19(1), 133–138. doi:10.1007/BF00942261 PMID:1867146
Branco, C. A. (2018). Pela paz e dignidade: abaixo a violência contra as pessoas idosas. In Barradas,
S. & Oliveira, A., (1ª Edição), Agenda Científica de Gerontologia. In Aprender, Envelhecer…Ser (pp.
91–97). Editora Alma Letra.
298
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Brozowski, K., & Hall, D. R. (2004). Growing old in a risk society: Elder abuse in Canada. Journal of
Elder Abuse & Neglect, 16(3), 65–81. doi:10.1300/J084v16n03_04
Bruce, M. L., Ten Have, T. R., Reynolds, C. F. III, Katz, I., Schulberg, H. C., Mulsant, B. H., & Alexopoulos,
G. S. (2004). Reducing suicidal ideation and depressive symptoms in depressed older primary
care patients: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(9),
1081–1091. doi:10.1001/jama.291.9.1081 PMID:14996777
Burnes, D., Pillemer, K., Caccamise, P., Mason, A., Henderson, C. R., & Lachs, M. S. (2015). Prevalence
of and risk factors for elder abuse and neglect in the community: A population-based study. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society, 63(9), 1906–1912. doi:10.1111/jgs.13601 PMID:26312573
Cabral, M., Ferreira, P., Silva, P., Jerónimo, P. & Marques, T. (2013). Processos de envelhecimento em
Portugal: usos do tempo, redes sociais e condições de vida. Lisboa: Fundação Francisco Manuel dos
Santos.
Cardoso, A. P. O., & Costa, L. M. A. C. (2006). Velhice e exclusão social: Um estudo no centro de
convívio e apoio à terceira idade do Tortosendo. Psychologica, 42, 89–114.
Carta de Ottawa. (1986). Primeira Conferência Internacional sobre Promoção da Saúde. BVSMS.
https://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/carta_ottawa.pdf
Carvalho, P., & Dias, O. (2011). Adaptação dos idosos institucionalizados. Millenium, 40, 161–184.
Constituição da República Portuguesa. (2000). Livraria Almedina.
Cooney, C., Howard, R., & Lawlor, B. (2006). Abuse of vulnerable people with dementia by their carers:
Can we identify those most at risk? International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(6), 564–571.
doi:10.1002/gps.1525 PMID:16783768
Decree-Law n.º 48/95, de 15 de março. (1995). Código Penal de 1982 versão consolidada posterior a
1995, atualizado pela Lei n.º 110/2015, de 26 de agosto. Diário da República. https://www.pgdlisboa.
pt/leis/lei_mostra_articulado.php?nid=109&tabela=leis
Deković, M. (1999). Risk and protective factors in the development of problem behavior during adolescent.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 28(6), 667–685. doi:10.1023/A:1021635516758
Dias, I. (2004). A violência sobre as mulheres e os idosos. Psychologica, 36, 33–61.
Direção-Geral de Saúde. (2016). Violência Interpessoal - Abordagem, Diagnóstico e Intervenção nos
Serviços de Saúde (2ª Edição). Lisboa.
Direção Geral de Saúde. (2017). Estratégia Nacional para o Envelhecimento Ativo e Saudável 2017-2025.
Proposta do Grupo de Trabalho Interministerial (Despacho n.º 12427/2016). Lisboa.
Eurostat. (2023). Statistics Explained: Population structure and ageing. Eurostat. https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php?title=Population_structure_and_ageing
299
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Gallagher-Thompson, D., Coon, D. W., Solano, N., Ambler, C., Rabinowitz, Y., & Thompson, L. W.
(2003). Change in indices of distress among Latino and Anglo female caregivers of elderly relatives
with dementia: Site-specific results from the REACH national collaborative study. The Gerontologist,
43(4), 580–591. doi:10.1093/geront/43.4.580 PMID:12937336
Gil, A. P., Fernandes, A. F., Nicolau, R., & Santos, A. J. (2013). Prevalência da Violência contra as pessoas
idosas – Uma revisão crítica da literatura. Sociologia. Problemas e Práticas, 72, 53–77.
Gil, A. P., Kislaya, I., Santos, A. J., Nunes, B., Nicolau, R., & Fernandes, A. A. (2015). Elder abuse in
Portugal: Findings from the first national prevalence study. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 27(3),
174–195. doi:10.1080/08946566.2014.953659 PMID:25122109
Gómez, L., Pérez, M., & Vila, J. (2001). Problemática actual del apoyo social y su relación con la salud:
Una revisión. Psicología Conductual, 9(1), 5–30.
Guarda Nacional Republicana. (2022). Evolução da Operação Censos Sénior. GNR. https://www.gnr.
pt/mostrarPdf.ashx?a=7&i=6628
Gum, A., King-Kallimanis, B., & Kohn, R. (2009). Prevalence of mood, anxiety, and substanceabuse
disorders for older Americans in the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication. The American Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17(9), 769–781. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ad4f5a PMID:19700949
Guralnick, S., Kemele, K., Stamm, B. H., & Greving, A. M. (2003). Rural geriatrics and gerontology. In
B. H. Stamm (Ed.), Rural behavioral health care: An interdisciplinary guide (pp. 193–202). American
Psychological Association., doi:10.1037/10489-015
Harvey, P. D. (2005). Schizophrenia in late life. Aging effects on symptoms and course of illness. American
Psychological Association., doi:10.1037/10873-000
Heck, L., & Gillespie, G. L. (2013). Interprofessional program to provide emergency sheltering to abused
elders. Advanced Emergency Nursing Journal, 35(2), 170–181. doi:10.1097/TME.0b013e31828ecc06
PMID:23636048
Hill, R. (2005). Positive aging: A guide for mental health professionals and consumers. W. W. Norton.
Huh, J. T., Weaver, C. M., Martin, J. L., Caskey, N. H., O’Riley, A., & Kramer, B. J. (2012). Effects
of a late-life suicide risk-assessment training on multidisciplinary healthcare providers. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 60(4), 775–780. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03843.x PMID:22288717
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2020). Projeções de população Residente 2018-2080. INE. https://
www.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_destaques&DESTAQUESdest_boui=406534255&
DESTAQUESmodo=2&xlang=pt
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2022). Censos 2021 Resultados Definitivos – Portugal. INE. https://
censos.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpgid=censos21_main&xpid=CENSOS21&xlang=pt
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge. (2014). Envelhecimento e Violência (2011-2014). INE.
http://repositorio.insa.pt/bitstream/10400.18/1955/3/Envelhecimento%20e%20Viol%C3%AAncia%20
2011-2014%20.pdf
300
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Kochanek, K. D., Xu, J., Murphy, S. L., Miniño, A. M., & Kung, H. (2012). Deaths: Final data for 2009.
National Vital Statistics Reports, 60(3), 1–116. PMID:24974587
Langford, C. P. H., Bowsher, J., Maloney, J. P., & Lillis, P. P. (1997). Social support: A conceptual
analysis. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 25(1), 95–100. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.1997025095.x
PMID:9004016
Law n.º 147/99, de 1 de setembro. Lei de proteção de crianças e jovens em perigo. Diário da República,
1.ª Série, n.º 204.
Law n.º 130/2015, de 04 de setembro. Estatuto da Vítima. Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 173.
Law n.º 49/2018, de 14 de agosto. Regime Jurídico do Maior Acompanhado. Diário da República, 1. ª
Série, n.º 156.
Law n.º 100/2019, de 6 de setembro. Estatuto do Cuidador Informal. Diário da República, 1. ª Série,
n.º 171.
Lin, N., & Ensel, W. M. (1989). Life stress and health: Stressors and resources. American Sociological
Review, 54(3), 382–399. doi:10.2307/2095612
López, I. V. (2006). El apoyo social de familias en situación de riesgo. (Documento nº 04/06). Espanha:
Fundación Acción Familiar.
López, A. B., & Sánchez, E. M. (2001). Estructura social, apoyo social y salud mental. Psicothema,
13(1), 17–23.
López, I., Menéndez, S., Lorence, B., Jiménez, L., Hidalgo, V., & Sánchez, J. (2007). Evaluación del
apoyo social mediante la escala ASSIS: Descripción y resultados en una muestra de madres en situación
de riesgo psicosocial. Intervención Psicosocial, 16(3), 323–337.
Lorence, B. (2008). Procesos de socialización parental con adolescentes de familias en situación de
riesgo psicosocial. V Premio Joven de Investigación de Familia (Documento nº 04/08), Madrid, Espanha:
Fundación Acción Familiar.
Luthar, S. S. (2006). Resilience in development: A synthesis of research across five decades. In D. Cicchetti
& D. J. Cohen (Eds.). Vol. 3: Development Psychopathology: Risk, disorder, and adaptation (2ªed,
pp. 739-795). New York, NY: Wiley.
Manita, C., Ribeiro, C., & Peixoto, C. (2009). Violência Doméstica: Compreender para Intervir, guia
de boas práticas para profissionais de instituições de apoio a vítimas. Comissão para a Cidadania e
Igualdade de Género, Lisboa.
Masten, A., & Wright, M. (1998). Cumulative risk and protection models of child maltreatment. Journal
of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma, 2(1), 7–30. doi:10.1300/J146v02n01_02
Mendes, F., & Xavier, P. (2017). A Ordem Jurídica Portuguesa e os Direitos da Pessoa Idosa. Millenium,
2, 135–140.
Minayo, M. C. S., & Cavalante, F. G. (2010). Suicídio entre pessoas idosas: revisão da literatura. Revista
Saúde Pública, 44(4), 750-757. São Paulo. doi:10.1590/S0034-89102010000400020
301
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Minuchin, S. (2005). Familias y terapia familiar. Colección Terapia Familiar. Gedisa Editorial.
Moracco, K. E., & Cole, T. B. (2009). Preventing intimate partner violence: Screening is not enough. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 302(5), 568–570. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.1135 PMID:19654392
Nelson, T. D. (2005). Ageism: Prejudice against our feared future self. The Journal of Social Issues,
61(2), 207–221. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2005.00402.x
Nunes, C., Lemos, I., Ayala-Nunes, L., & Costa, D. (2013). Acontecimentos de vida stressantes e apoio
social em famílias em risco psicossocial. Psicologia, Saúde & Doenças, 14(2), 313–320.
Nunes, C., Lemos, I., Costa, D., Nunes, L., & Almeida, A. (2011). Social support and stressful life
events in portuguese multi-problem families. International Journal of Developmental and Educational
Psychology, 5(1), 497–505.
Oliveira, J. (2008). Psicologia do Idoso. Temas Complementares. Legis Editora.
Ordem dos Psicólogos, P. (2022). Intervenção Psicológica com Adultos mais Velhos. Manual de Apoio
Pedagógico. Documento Não publicado (4ª edição), Lisboa.
Paúl, C., & Fonseca, A. (2001). Psicossociologia da Saúde. Climepsi Editores.
Pearson, J. L., & Brown, G. K. (2000). Suicide prevention in late life: Directions for science and practice.
Clinical Psychology Review, 20(6), 685–705. doi:10.1016/S0272-7358(99)00066-5 PMID:10983264
Pillemer, K., Burnes, D., Riffin, C., & Lachs, M. S. (2016). Elder Abuse: Global Situation, Risk Factors,
and Prevention Strategies. The Gerontologist, 56(2, Suppl 2), 194–205. doi:10.1093/geront/gnw004
PMID:26994260
Pillemer, K., & Finkelhor, D. (1988). The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The
Gerontologist, 28(1), 51–57. doi:10.1093/geront/28.1.51 PMID:3342992
Pinto, A. (2021). Inflamação e envelhecimento: verdade ou consequência? In Barradas, S. & Oliveira,
A., (1ª Edição), Agenda Científica de Gerontologia. “Aprender, Envelhecer…Ser” (pp. 17-20). Editora
Alma Letra. Coimbra.
PORDATA. (2022). Estatísticas sobre Portugal e Europa. PORDATA. https://www.pordata.pt/portugal
PORDATA. (2023). Estatísticas sobre Portugal e Europa. PORDATA. https://www.pordata.pt/europa
Ramalho, A., & Ramalho, J. (2014). A relevância da formação em Gerontologia Social na implementação
de políticas sociais em Portugal”. In Luz, H. & Miguel, I.: Gerontologia Social. Perspetivas de Análise
de Intervenção. Coimbra: Centro de Investigação em Inovação Social e Organizacional (CIS), Instituto
Superior Bissaya Barreto.
Ramos, P. (2020). Avaliação do impacto da operação Censos Sénior, desenvolvida pela Guarda Nacional
Republicana, na prevenção criminal. Instituto Universitário Militar Departamento de Estudos
Pós-Graduados.
Regulatory Decree n.º 1/2022, de 10 de janeiro. Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 6.
302
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Reay, A. M. C., & Browne, K. D. (2002). The effectiveness of psychological interventions with individuals
who physically abuse or neglect their elderly dependents. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 17(4),
416–431. doi:10.1177/0886260502017004005
Resolução do Conselho de Ministros n-º 63/2015, de 25 de agosto. Estratégia de Proteção ao Idoso.
Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 165.
Ribeiro, J. L. (1999). Escala de Satisfação com o Suporte Social (ESSS). Análise Psicológica, 17(3),
547–558.
Rodrigo, M. J., Máiquez, M. L., Martín, J. C., & Byrne, S. (2008). Preservación familiar. Un enfoque
positivo para la intervención con familias. Pirámide.
Rodrigo, M. J., Martín, J. C., Máiquez, M. L., & Rodríguez, G. (2007). Informal and formal supports
and maternal child-rearing practices in at-risk and non at-risk psychosocial contexts. Children and Youth
Services Review, 29(3), 329–347. doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2006.03.010
Rutter, M. (1987). Parental mental disorder as a psychiatric risk factor. In A. Hales & A. Frances (Eds.),
American Psychiatric Association – Annual Review (Vol. 6, pp. 647–663). American Psychiatric Press, Inc.
Rutter, M. (2005). Multiple meanings of a development perspective on psychopathology. European
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 2(3), 221–252. doi:10.1080/17405620500237706
Sacks, D., Das, D., Romanick, R., Caron, M., Morano, C., & Fahs, M. C. (2012). The value of daily
money management: An analysis of outcomes and costs. Journal of Evidence-Based Social Work, 9(5),
498–511. doi:10.1080/15433714.2011.581530 PMID:23092378
Sapienza, G., & Pedremônico, M. (2005). Risco, protecção e resiliência no desenvolvimento da criança
e do adolescente. Psicologia em Estudo, 10(2), 209–216. doi:10.1590/S1413-73722005000200007
Schulz, R., & Martire, L. M. (2004). Family caregiving of persons with dementia: Prevalence, health
effects, and support strategies. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12(3), 240–249.
doi:10.1097/00019442-200405000-00002 PMID:15126224
Semmer, N. K., Elfering, A., Jacobshagen, N., Perrot, T., Beehr, T. A., & Boos, N. (2008). The emotional
meaning of instrumental social support. International Journal of Stress Management, 15(3), 235–251.
doi:10.1037/1072-5245.15.3.235
Simões. (2006). A nova velhice. Um novo público a educar. Âmbar.
Smith, T. B., McCullough, M. E., & Poll, J. (2003). Religiousness and Depression: Evidence for a Main
Effect and the Moderating Influence of Stressful Life Events. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4), 614–636.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.4.614 PMID:12848223
Siqueira, M. M. M. (2008). Construção e validação da escala de percepção de suporte social. Psicologia
em Estudo, 13(2), 381–388. doi:10.1590/S1413-73722008000200021
Skok, A., Harvey, D., & Reddihough, D. (2006). Perceived stress, perceived social support, and wellbeing
among mothers of school-aged children with cerebral palsy. Journal of Intellectual & Developmental
Disability, 31(1), 53–57. doi:10.1080/13668250600561929 PMID:16766323
303
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Sousa, L., & Rodrigues, S. (2009). Linking formal and informal support in multiproblem low-income
families: The role of the family manager. Journal of Community Psychology, 37(5), 649–662. doi:10.1002/
jcop.20313
Thoits, P. A. (1982). Life stress, social support, and psychological vulnerability: Epidemiological
considerations. Journal of Community Psychology, 10(4), 341–362. doi:10.1002/1520-
6629(198210)10:4<341::AID-JCOP2290100406>3.0.CO;2-J PMID:10298894
United Nations Economic Commision for Europe. (2013). Abuse of Older Persons. UNECE Policy Brief
on Ageing, (14), 24.
Vandeweerd, C., Paveza, G. J., & Fulmer, T. (2006). Abuse and neglect in older adults with Alzheimer’s
disease. The Nursing Clinics of North America, 41(1), 43–55. doi:10.1016/j.cnur.2005.09.004
PMID:16492453
Wilber, K. H., & McNeilly, D. P. (2001). Elder abuse and victimization. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie
(Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging (pp. 569–591). Academic Press.
World Health Organization. (1986). Carta de Ottawa. Primeira Conferência Internacional sobre Promoção
da Saúde. WHO. https://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/carta_ottawa.pdf
World Health Organization. (1997). WHOQOL: Measuring quality of life, 13. Genéve. WHO. https://
apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/63482
World Health Organization. (1999). A life course perspective of maintaining independence in older age.
Genéve. WHO. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/65576
World Health Organization. (2002). Active ageing: a policy framework. Genéve. WHO. https://apps.
who.int/iris/handle/10665/67215
World Health Organization. (2011). European report on preventing elder maltreatment. Geneva. WHO.
https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/144676/e95110.pdf
World Health Organization. (2012). Good health adds life to years: Global brief for World Health Day
2012. WHO. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-DCO-WHD-2012.2
World Health Organization. (2014). Global status report on violence prevention 2014. WHO. https://
www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241564793
World Health Organization. (2015). World Report on Ageing and Health. WHO. https://apps.who.int/
iris/handle/10665/186463
World Health Organization. (2022a). Abuse of older people. Violence Prevention Information System
(Violence Info). WHO. https://apps.who.int/violence-info/abuse-of-older-people
World Health Organization. (2022b). Abuse of older people. Fact Sheets. WHO. https://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs357/en/
World Health Organization. (2022c). Tackling abuse of older people. Five priorities for the United Nations
Decade of Healthy Ageing [2021-2030]. Decade of healthy ageing. WHO. https://www.who.int/
publications/i/item/9789240052550
304
Challenges From Protecting the Elderly to Promoting Active and Healthy Aging
﻿
Yunes, M. (2003). Psicologia Positiva e Resiliência: O foco no indivíduo e na família. Psicologia em
Estudo, 8(spe), 75–84. doi:10.1590/S1413-73722003000300010
ENDNOTES
1 Aging index “consists of the ratio between the elderly population and the young population, usually
defined as the quotient between the number of people aged 65 or over and the number of people
aged between 0 and 14 years (usually expressed by 100 people from 0 to 14 years old)” (INE, 2022).
2 According to INE (2020), “The exercise of resident population projections, whose main results
are presented in this report is based on hypotheses the future evolution of the demographic components
fertility, mortality and migration. These hypotheses do not have an underlying impact that the
current situation determined by the Covid-19 pandemic may have on future demographic trends.
In any case, the information made available today is useful for establishing a benchmark against
which to assess future developments.”
﻿
Compilation of References
.Abellan van Kan, G., Rolland, Y., Andrieu, S., Bauer, J., Beauchet, O., Bonnefoy, M., Cesari, M., Donini, L. M., Gillette
Guyonnet, S., Inzitari, M., Nourhashemi, F., Onder, G., Ritz, P., Salva, A., Visser, M., & Vellas, B. (2009). Gait speed at
usual pace as a predictor of adverse outcomes in community-dwelling older people an International Academy on Nutrition
and Aging (IANA) Task Force. The Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging, 13(10), 881–889. doi:10.100712603-
009-0246-z PMID:19924348
Abreu, W. C. (2003). Saúde, Doença e diversidade cultural. Instituto Piaget.
Academic. (2022). World Guidelines for Falls Prevention and Management for Older Adults. A Global Initiative. Oxford
Academic. https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/ageing/afac205
Acosta, D.J., Rinfret, A., Plant, J. & Hsu, A.T. (2022). Using Patient Simulation to Promote Best Practices in Fall Prevention
and Postfall Assessment in Nursing Homes. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 37(2), 117-122. . doi:10.1097/
NCQ.0000000000000599
Adhikary, G., Shawon, M. S. R., Ali, M. W., Shamsuzzaman, M., Ahmed, S., Shackelford, K. A., Woldeab, A., Alam,
N., Lim, S. S., Levine, A., Gakidou, E., & Uddin, M. J. (2018). Factors influencing patients’ satisfaction at different
levels of health facilities in Bangladesh: Results from patient exit interviews. PLoS One, 13(5), e0196643. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0196643 PMID:29768441
Administrative Rule. (2013). Condições de instalação e funcionamento do serviço de apoio domiciliário. Diário da
República, 1(21), 605 – 608.
Adua, E., Frimpong, K., Li, X., & Wang, W. (2017). Emerging issues in public health: A perspective on Ghana’s healthcare
expenditure, policies and outcomes. The EPMA Journal, 8(3), 197–206. doi:10.100713167-017-0109-3 PMID:29021830
AFFINITY. (2019). AFFINITY National Falls and Bone Health Symposium 2019. Health Service Executive. https://
www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/olderpeople/falls-prevention-and-bone-health/events/
AFFINITY. (2022). About AFFINITY National Falls and bone health project 2018-2023. Health Service Executive.
https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/olderpeople/falls-prevention-and-bone-health/
Äijö, M., Abreu, C da CF., & Goswami, N. (2021a). Fall Prevention Education: Good Examples From Higher Education.
In the book Eklund P (editor). Integrated Care and Fall Prevention in Active and Healthy Aging, 171-181. IGI Global.
doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch009
Äijö, M., Havulinna, S., Karinkanta, S., Tervo-Heikkinen, T., & Lönnroos, E. (2021b). Fall Prevention in Education and
Training of Healthcare Students, Professionals, and Non-Professionals. In the book Eklund P. (editor) Integrated Care
and Fall Prevention in Active and Healthy Aging, 157-170. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch008
305
Compilation of References
Äijö, M., Silén-Lipponen, M., Turjamaa, R., & Tervo-Heikkinen, T. (2019b). Health care students theoretical understanding
in fall prevention among older people. EAPRIL 2018 Conference Proceedings, Portorož, Slovenia. https://www.
eapril.org/sites/default/files/2019-03/Proceedings%202018%20publication.pdf
Äijö, M. (2019a). Hyviä pedagogisia ratkaisuja kaatumisten ehkäisyn opetukseen. AKESO-tutkimus ja kehittämishanke.
Savonia-ammattikorkeakoulu julkaisusarja 4. Savonia-ammattikorkeakoulu. Saatavissa., https://www.theseus.
fi/handle/10024/186053
Ajuied, A., Wong, F., Smith, C., Norris, M., Earnshaw, P., Back, D., & Davies, A. (2014). Anterior cruciate ligament
injury and radiologic progression of knee osteoarthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. The American Journal
of Sports Medicine, 42(9), 2242–2252. doi:10.1177/0363546513508376 PMID:24214929
Alanee, S., Heiner, J., Liu, N., & Monga, M. (2009). Horseback riding: Impact on sexual dysfunction and lower urinary
tract symptoms in men and women. Urology, 73(1), 109–114. doi:10.1016/j.urology.2008.07.058 PMID:18950839
Alcañiz, M., & Solé-Auró, A. (2018). Feeling good in old age: Factors explaining health-related quality of life. Health
and Quality of Life Outcomes, 16(1), 48. doi:10.118612955-018-0877-z PMID:29534708
Al-Damen, R. (2017). Health Care Service Quality and Its Impact on Patient Satisfaction “Case of Al-Bashir Hospital.”.
International Journal of Business and Management, 12(9), 136. doi:10.5539/ijbm.v12n9p136
Alexopoulos, P., Grimmer, T., Perneczky, R., Domes, G., & Kurz, A. (2006). Progression to dementia in clinical subtypes
of mild cognitive impairment. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 22(1), 27–34. doi:10.1159/000093101
PMID:16679762
Alioto, A. G., Kramer, J. H., Borish, S., Neuhaus, J., Saloner, R., Wynn, M., & Foley, J. M. (2017). Long-term test-retest
reliability of the California Verbal Learning Test–second edition. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 31(8), 1449–1458.
doi:10.1080/13854046.2017.1310300 PMID:28387582
Al, M. M. (2017). Effects of hospital service quality on patients satisfaction and behavioural intention of doctors and
nurses. Saudi J. Med. Pharm. Sci, (July). doi:10.21276/SJMPS
Aloh, H. E., Onwujekwe, O. E., Aloh, O. G., Okoronkwo, I. L., & Nweke, C. J. (2020). Impact of socioeconomic status
on patient experience on quality of care for ambulatory healthcare services in tertiary hospitals in Southeast Nigeria.
BMC Health Services Research, 20(1), 1–9. doi:10.118612913-020-05332-0 PMID:32456633
Alves, C., & Serrão, C. (2018). Risk factors for the occurrence of violence against the elderly: A systematic review. Pan
American Journal of Aging Research, 6(2), 58–71. doi:10.15448/2357-9641.2018.2.29964
Alzheimer Europe. (2016). Decision making and legal capacity in dementia. Country comparisons. Alzheimer Europe.
Alzheimer’s Association. (2022). 10 Early Signs and Symptoms of Alzheimer’s. Alzheimer’s Association. https://www.
alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/10_signs
Alzheimer’s Society. (2016). Fix Dementia Care: NHS and Care Homes. Alzheimer’s Association. https://www.alzheimers.
org.uk/sites/default/files/migrate/downloads/fix_dementia_care_nhs_and_care_homes_report.pdf
American Bar Association Commission on Law and Aging & American Psychological Association. (2005). Assessment
of older adults with diminished capacity: A handbook for psychologists. American Bar Association and American
Psychological Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (2022). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TRTM)
(Fifth Edit). APA.
306
Compilation of References
American Thoracic Society Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical Pulmonary Function Laboratories. (2002).
ATS statement: Guidelines for the six-minute walk test. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,
166(1), 111–117. doi:10.1164/ajrccm.166.1.at1102 PMID:12091180
Amieva, H., Lafont, S., Auriacombe, S., Rainville, C., Orgogozo, J.-M., Dartigues, J.-F., & Fabrigoule, C. (1998). Analysis
of error types in the Trail Making Test evidences an inhibitory deficit in dementia of the Alzheimer type. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 20(2), 280–285. doi:10.1076/jcen.20.2.280.1161 PMID:9777482
Anderson, E. (2008). Cognitive change in old age. In R. Jacoby, C. Oppenheimer, T. Dening, & A. Thomas (Eds.), Oxford
textbook of old age psychiatry (pp. 33–50). Oxford University Press.
Andersson, C., Lindau, M., Almkvist, O., Engfeldt, P., Johansson, S.-E., & Jönhagen, M. E. (2006). Identifying patients
at high and low risk of cognitive decline using Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test among middle-aged memory clinic
outpatients. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 21(4), 251–259. doi:10.1159/000091398 PMID:16465053
Aniwattanapong, D., Tangwongchai, S., Supasitthumrong, T., Hemrunroj, S., Tunvirachaisakul, C., Tawankanjanachot,
I., Chuchuen, P., Snabboon, T., Carvalho, A. F., & Maes, M. (2019). Validation of the Thai version of the short Boston
Naming Test (T-BNT) in patients with Alzheimer’s dementia and mild cognitive impairment: Clinical and biomarker
correlates. Aging & Mental Health, 23(7), 840–850. doi:10.1080/13607863.2018.1501668 PMID:30351202
Anwar, R., Kini, S. G., Sait, S., & Bruce, W. J. (2016). Early clinical and radiological results of total knee arthroplasty
using patient-specific guides in obese patients. Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, 136(2), 265–270.
doi:10.100700402-015-2399-z PMID:26742495
APAV. (2021). Estatísticas APAV Relatório Anual 2021. Consultado a 10 de fevereiro de 2023. APAV. https://apav.pt/
apav_v3/images/press/Relatorio_Anual_2021.pdf
APAV. (2023). Tipos de Violência. APAV. https://apav.pt/vd/index.php/features2
Appelbaum, P. S., & Grisso, T. (1988). Assessing patients’ capacities to consent to treatment. The New England Journal
of Medicine, 319(25), 1635–1638. doi:10.1056/NEJM198812223192504 PMID:3200278
Araújo, T. B., de Oliveira, R. J., Martins, W. R., de Moura Pereira, M., Copetti, F., & Safons, M. P. (2013). Effects of
hippotherapy on mobility, strength and balance in elderly. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 56(3), 478–481.
doi:10.1016/j.archger.2012.12.007 PMID:23290005
Araujo, T., Martins, W. R., Freitas, M. P., Camargos, E., Mota, J., & Safons, M. P. (2019). An Exploration of Equine-
Assisted Therapy to Improve Balance, Functional Capacity, and Cognition in Older Adults With Alzheimer Disease.
Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy, 42(3), E155–E160. doi:10.1519/JPT.0000000000000167 PMID:29630005
Arcara, G., Burgio, F., Benavides-Varela, S., Toffano, R., Gindri, P., Tonini, E., Meneghello, F., & Semenza, C. (2019).
Numerical Activities of Daily Living - Financial (NADL-F): A tool for the assessment of financial capacities. Neuropsychological
Rehabilitation, 29(7), 1062–1084. doi:10.1080/09602011.2017.1359188 PMID:28880732
Archer, R. P., Stredny, R. V., & Zoby, M. (2006). Introduction to forensic uses of clinical assessment instruments. In R.
P. Archer (Ed.), Forensic uses of clinical assessment instruments (pp. 1–18). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Arevalo‐Rodriguez, I., & Smailagic, N., i Figuls, M. R., Ciapponi, A., Sanchez‐Perez, E., Giannakou, A., Pedraza, O.
L., Cosp, X. B., & Cullum, S. (2015). Mini‐Mental State Examination (MMSE) for the detection of Alzheimer’s disease
and other dementias in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 3.
PMID:25740785
307
Compilation of References
Arpey, N. C., Gaglioti, A. H., & Rosenbaum, M. E. (2017). How socioeconomic status affects patient perceptions of health
care: A qualitative study. Journal of Primary Care & Community Health, 8(3), 169–175. doi:10.1177/2150131917697439
PMID:28606031
Ashendorf, L., Jefferson, A. L., O’Connor, M. K., Chaisson, C., Green, R. C., & Stern, R. A. (2008). Trail Making Test
errors in normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 23(2), 129–137.
doi:10.1016/j.acn.2007.11.005 PMID:18178372
Asl, A. M., Mehdizadeh, M., Roudbari, P. R., Habibi, S.-A., Khatoon, J. N., & Taghizadeh, G. (2018). Reliability and
validity of the Persian version of the clock drawing test in Iranian patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. Journal
of Clinical Physiotherapy Research, 3(2), 78–81.
Associação de Apoio à Vítima (APAV) (2020). Relatório Portugal mais velho. APAV, Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian.
https://apav.pt/apav_v3/index.php/pt/2488-relatorio-portugal-mais-velho
Auning, E., Rongve, A., Fladby, T., Booij, J., Hortobágyi, T., Siepel, F. J., Ballard, C., & Aarsland, D. (2011). Early and
presenting symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 32(3), 202–208.
doi:10.1159/000333072 PMID:22095040
Avazeh, M., Babaei, N., Farhoudi, S., Kalteh, E. A., & Gholizadeh, B. (2019). The study of self-care and related factors
in the elderly with chronic diseases in 2018. Journal of Health and Care, 21(2), 135–144. doi:10.29252/jhc.21.2.135
Baek, M. J., Kim, K., Park, Y. H., & Kim, S. (2016). The validity and reliability of the mini-mental state examination-2
for detecting mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease in a Korean population. PLoS One, 11(9), e0163792.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0163792 PMID:27668883
Baker, N. R., & Blakely, K. K. (2017). Gastrointestinal disturbances in the elderly. Nursing Clinics, 52(3), 419–431.
PMID:28779823
Balthazar, M. L. F., Cendes, F., & Damasceno, B. P. (2008). Semantic error patterns on the Boston Naming Test in normal
aging, amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and mild Alzheimer’s disease: Is there semantic disruption? Neuropsychology,
22(6), 703–709. doi:10.1037/a0012919 PMID:18999343
Baptista, M. N. (2005). Desenvolvimento do inventário de percepção de suporte familiar (IPSF): Estudos psicométricos
preliminares. Psico-USF, 10(1), 11–19. doi:10.1590/S1413-82712005000100003
Baptista, M. N., Baptista, A. S. D., & Torres, E. C. R. (2006). Associação entre suporte social, depressão e ansiedade
em gestantes. Revista de Psicologia da Vetor Editora, 7(1), 39–48.
Barberger-Gateau, P., Commenges, D., Gagnon, M., Letenneur, L., Sauvel, C., & Dartigues, J. F. (1992). Instrumental
activities of daily living as a screening tool for cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly community dwellers. Journal
of the American Geriatrics Society, 40(11), 1129–1134. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.1992.tb01802.x PMID:1401698
Barnes, C., & Mercer, G. (2003). Disability. Polity Press.
Barrera, J. M. Jr. (1991). Social Support Interventions and the Third Law of Ecology. American Journal of Community
Psychology, 19(1), 133–138. doi:10.1007/BF00942261 PMID:1867146
Bartosch, P. S., Kristensson, J., McGuigan, F. E., & Akesson, K. E. (2020). Frailty and prediction of recurrent falls
over 10 years in a community cohort of 75-year-old women. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research, 32(11), 1–10.
doi:10.100740520-019-01467-1 PMID:31939201
308
Compilation of References
Baumann, D., Ruch, W., Margelisch, K., Gander, F., & Wagner, L. (2020). Character strengths and life satisfaction in later
life: An analysis of different living conditions. Applied Research in Quality of Life, 15(2), 329–347. doi:10.100711482-
018-9689-x
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50(1-3), 7–15. doi:10.1016/0010-0277(94)90018-3 PMID:8039375
Beinotti, F., Correia, N., Christofoletti, G., & Borges, G. (2010). Use of hippotherapy in gait training for hemiparetic
post-stroke. Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria, 68(6), 908–913. doi:10.1590/S0004-282X2010000600015 PMID:21243251
Beishon, L. C., Batterham, A. P., Quinn, T. J., Nelson, C. P., Panerai, R. B., Robinson, T., & Haunton, V. J. (2019).
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III (ACE‐III) and mini‐ACE for the detection of dementia and mild cognitive
impairment. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 12. PMID:31846066
Bell-McGinty, S., Podell, K., Franzen, M., Baird, A. D., & Williams, M. J. (2002). Standard measures of executive function
in predicting instrumental activities of daily living in older adults. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
17(9), 828–834. doi:10.1002/gps.646 PMID:12221656
Benge, J. F., Balsis, S., Geraci, L., Massman, P. J., & Doody, R. S. (2009). How well do the ADAS-cog and its subscales
measure cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease? Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 28(1), 63–69.
doi:10.1159/000230709 PMID:19641319
Bentum-Micah, G., & Ma, Z. (n.d.). Perceived service quality, a key to improved patient satisfaction and loyalty in
healthcare delivery: the servqual dimension approach. Papers.Ssrn.Com. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=3603338
Berend, M. (2010). Revision of the Stiff Total Knee Arthroplasty: An Operation to Try to Avoid. Seminars in Arthroplasty,
21(2), 108–109. doi:10.1053/j.sart.2009.12.001
Bertrand, K., Raymond, M. H., Miller, W. C., Ginis, K. A. M., & Demers, L. (2017). Walking aids for enabling activity
and participation: A systematic review. American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 96(12), 894–903.
doi:10.1097/PHM.0000000000000836 PMID:29176406
Best Practice Advocacy Centre New Zealand. (2022). Stay Independent Falls Prevention Toolkit. BPAC. https://bpac.
org.nz/falls/
Bilder, R. M., & Reise, S. P. (2019). Neuropsychological tests of the future: How do we get there from here? The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 33(2), 220–245. doi:10.1080/13854046.2018.1521993 PMID:30422045
Bi, M., Zhao, Z., Yang, J., & Wang, Y. (2019). Comparison of case-based learning and traditional method in teaching
postgraduate students of medical oncology. Medical Teacher, 41(10), 1124–1128. doi:10.1080/0142159X.2019.1617414
PMID:31215320
Bisdorff, A., Bosser, G., Gueguen, R., & Perrin, P. (2013). The epidemiology of vertigo, dizziness, and unsteadiness and
its links to co-morbidities. Frontiers in Neurology, 4, 29. doi:10.3389/fneur.2013.00029 PMID:23526567
Black, A. C., McMahon, T. J., Rosenheck, R. A., Ball, S. A., Ries, R. K., Ames, D., & Rosen, M. I. (2014). Development
of the Clinician Assessment of Financial Incapability (CAFI). Psychiatry Research, 215(3), 784–789. doi:10.1016/j.
psychres.2014.01.021 PMID:24495575
Black, E. L., Ross, T. J., Flanagan, T., Rabheru, K., & Breiter, H. J. (2007). A Financial Assessment & Capacity Test
(FACT) for a psychogeriatric population: Development and concurrent validity. Research Insights of the Regional
Mental Health Care.
309
Compilation of References
Blackwell, A. D., Sahakian, B. J., Vesey, R., Semple, J. M., Robbins, T. W., & Hodges, J. R. (2004). Detecting dementia:
Novel neuropsychological markers of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders,
17(1–2), 42–48. doi:10.1159/000074081 PMID:14560064
Bleijlevens, M. H., Diederiks, J. P., Hendriks, M. R., van Haastregt, J. C., Crebolder, H. F., & van Eijk, J. T. (2010).
Relationship between location and activity in injurious falls: An exploratory study. BMC Geriatrics, 10(1), 40.
doi:10.1186/1471-2318-10-40 PMID:20565871
Boehler, C. & Abadie, F. (2015). Monitoring and Assessment Framework for the European Innovation Partnership on
Active and Healthy Ageing (MAFEIP). Conceptual description of the Monitoring and Assessment Framework for the
EIP on AHA. Publications Office of the European Union.
Bohannon, R. W. (1997). Comfortable and maximum walking speed of adults aged 20-79 years: Reference values and
determinants. Age and Ageing, 26(1), 15–19. doi:10.1093/ageing/26.1.15 PMID:9143432
Bohlmeijer, E., Lamers, S. M. A., & Fledderus, M. (2015). Flourishing in people with depressive symptomatology
increases with Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Postgraduate Medical Journal, 91(1081), 94–100. doi:10.1136/
postgradmedj-2014-132682 PMID:25596344
Bojan, K., Christogianni, A., & Mukaetova-Ladinska, E. (2022). The Role of Serious Games in Healthcare and Its Contribution
to the Healthcare Ecosystem: Serious Games vs. Wearables. In Handbook of Research on Promoting Economic
and Social Development Through Serious Games (pp. 118–139). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-9732-3.ch007
Bolton, G. M. (1979). Towards a Theory of Drama in Education. Longman.
Bondi, M. W., Monsch, A. U., Butters, N., Salmon, D. P., & Paulsen, J. S. (1993). Utility of a modified version of the
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in the detection of dementia of the Alzheimer type. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 7(2),
161–170. doi:10.1080/13854049308401518 PMID:29022479
Borson, S. (2010). Cognition, aging, and disabilities: Conceptual issues. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics
of North America, 21(2), 375–382. doi:10.1016/j.pmr.2010.01.001 PMID:20494283
Borzuola, R., Giombini, A., Torre, G., Campi, S., Albo, E., Bravi, M., Borrione, P., Fossati, C., & Macaluso, A. (2020).
Central and Peripheral Neuromuscular Adaptations to Ageing. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(3), 741. doi:10.3390/
jcm9030741 PMID:32182904
Bourne, R. B., Chesworth, B. M., Davis, A. M., Mahomed, N. N., & Charron, K. D. (2010). Patient satisfaction after
total knee arthroplasty: Who is satisfied and who is not? Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, 468(1), 57–63.
doi:10.100711999-009-1119-9 PMID:19844772
Bousquet, J., Bewick, M., Cano, A., Eklund, P., Fico, G., Goswami, N., et al. (2017). Building Bridges for Innovation
in Ageing: Synergies between Action Groups of the EIP on AHA. The journal of nutrition, health & ageing, 21(1),
92–104. doi:10.1007/s12603-016-0803-1
Bowie, C. R., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Administration and interpretation of the Trail Making Test. Nature Protocols,
1(5), 2277–2281. doi:10.1038/nprot.2006.390 PMID:17406468
Bowling, A., & Dieppe, P. (2005). What is successful ageing and who should define it? BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.),
331(7531), 1548–1551. doi:10.1136/bmj.331.7531.1548 PMID:16373748
Boyle, P. A., Paul, R. H., Moser, D. J., & Cohen, R. A. (2004). Executive impairments predict functional declines in
vascular dementia. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 18(1), 75–82. doi:10.1080/13854040490507172 PMID:15595360
310
Compilation of References
Branco, C. A. (2018). Pela paz e dignidade: abaixo a violência contra as pessoas idosas. In Barradas, S. & Oliveira, A.,
(1ª Edição), Agenda Científica de Gerontologia. In Aprender, Envelhecer…Ser (pp. 91–97). Editora Alma Letra.
Brandt, K. D., Radin, E. L., Dieppe, P. A., & van de Putte, L. (2006). Yet more evidence that osteoarthritis is not a cartilage
disease. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 65(10), 1261–1264. doi:10.1136/ard.2006.058347 PMID:16973787
Brännström, J., Lövheim, H., Gustafson, Y., & Nordström, P. (2019). Association between antidepressant drug use and
hip fracture in older people before and after treatment initiation. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(2), 172–179. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.
2018.3679 PMID:30601883
Breen, R., & Müller, W. (2020). Education and intergenerational social mobility in Europe and the United States.
Stanford University Press.
Briggs, R., Kennelly, S. P., & Kenny, R. A. (2018). Does baseline depression increase the risk of unexplained and
accidental falls in a cohort of community‐dwelling older people? Data from The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing
(TILDA). International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 33(2), e205–e211. doi:10.1002/gps.4770 PMID:28766755
Brown, D.K., Fosnight, S., Whitford, M., Hazelett, S., Mcquown, C., Drost, J.C., et al. (2018). Interprofessional education
model for geriatric falls risk assessment and prevention. BMJ Open Quality, 7(4), e000417. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2018-000417
Brown, D. C., Hayward, M. D., Montez, J. K., Hummer, R. A., Chiu, C. T., & Hidajat, M. M. (2012). The significance of
education for mortality compression in the United States. Demography, 49(3), 819–840. doi:10.100713524-012-0104-1
PMID:22556045
Brown, G. T. L. (2017). Assessment of Student Achievement (1st ed.). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315162058
Brozowski, K., & Hall, D. R. (2004). Growing old in a risk society: Elder abuse in Canada. Journal of Elder Abuse &
Neglect, 16(3), 65–81. doi:10.1300/J084v16n03_04
Bruce, M. L., Ten Have, T. R., Reynolds, C. F. III, Katz, I., Schulberg, H. C., Mulsant, B. H., & Alexopoulos, G. S. (2004).
Reducing suicidal ideation and depressive symptoms in depressed older primary care patients: A randomized controlled
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(9), 1081–1091. doi:10.1001/jama.291.9.1081 PMID:14996777
Bruyneel, L., Li, B., Ausserhofer, D., Lesaffre, E., Dumitrescu, I., Smith, H. L., Sloane, D. M., Aiken, L. H., & Sermeus,
W. (2015). Organization of Hospital Nursing, Provision of Nursing Care, and Patient Experiences With Care in Europe.
Medical Care Research and Review: MCRR, 72(6), 643–664. doi:10.1177/1077558715589188 PMID:26062612
Bryan, S., Goldsmith, L. J., Davis, J. C., Hejazi, S., MacDonald, V., McAllister, P., Randall, E., Suryaprakash, N., Wu, A.
D., & Sawatzky, R. (2018). Revisiting patient satisfaction following total knee arthroplasty: A longitudinal observational
study. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 19(1), 423. doi:10.118612891-018-2340-z PMID:30497445
Buchman, A. S., Shah, R. C., Leurgans, S. E., Boyle, P. A., Wilson, R. S., & Bennett, D. A. (2010). Musculoskeletal pain
and incident disability in community-dwelling older adults. Arthritis Care and Research, 62(9), 1287–1293. doi:10.1002/
acr.20200 PMID:20853470
Budson, A. E., & Solomon, P. R. (2016). Chapter 2 - Evaluating the Patient with Memory Loss or Dementia. In A. E.
Budson & P. R. Solomon (Eds.), Memory Loss, Alzheimer’s Disease, and Dementia (Second Edition) (Second Edi, pp.
5–38). Elsevier.
Bunketorp-Käll, L., Pekna, M., Pekny, M., Blomstrand, C., & Nilsson, M. (2019). Effects of horse-riding therapy and
rhythm and music-based therapy on functional mobility in late phase after stroke. NeuroRehabilitation, 45(4), 483–492.
doi:10.3233/NRE-192905 PMID:31868694
311
Compilation of References
Burnes, D., Pillemer, K., Caccamise, P., Mason, A., Henderson, C. R., & Lachs, M. S. (2015). Prevalence of and risk
factors for elder abuse and neglect in the community: A population-based study. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 63(9), 1906–1912. doi:10.1111/jgs.13601 PMID:26312573
Burnes, D., Sheppard, C., Henderson, C. R. Jr, Wassel, M., Cope, R., Barber, C., & Pillemer, K. (2019). Interventions to
reduce ageism against older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Public Health, 109(8),
e1–e9. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2019.305123 PMID:31219720
Burns, A., Lawlor, B., & Craig, S. (2009). Assessment Scales in Old Age Psychiatry (2nd ed.). Informa Healthcare.
Burton, C. L., Strauss, E., Hultsch, D. F., & Hunter, M. A. (2006). Cognitive functioning and everyday problem solving
in older adults. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 20(3), 432–452. doi:10.1080/13854040590967063 PMID:16895857
Buttigieg, S. C., Ilinca, S., de Sao Jose, J. M., & Larsson, A. T. (2018). Researching ageism in health-care and long term
care. In Contemporary perspectives on ageism (pp. 493–515). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-73820-8_29
Cabral, M., Ferreira, P., Silva, P., Jerónimo, P. & Marques, T. (2013). Processos de envelhecimento em Portugal: usos
do tempo, redes sociais e condições de vida. Lisboa: Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Cacioppo, S. (2018). Loneliness in the Modern Age: An Evolutionary Theory of Loneliness (ETL).
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 58, 127–197. doi:10.1016/bs.aesp.2018.03.003
Cameron, I. D., Dyer, S. M., Panagoda, C. E., Murray, G. R., Hill, K. D., Cumming, R. G., & Kerse, N. (2018). Interventions
for preventing falls in older people in care facilities and hospitals. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 9(1),
CD005465. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005465.pub4 PMID:30191554
Campbell, D. (2013). Normative data. In Encyclopedia of Autism Spectrum Disorders. Springer New York, NY.
Campbell, R. J., & Lichtenberg, P. A. (2021). A Short Form of the Financial Exploitation Vulnerability Scale. Clinical
Gerontologist, 44(5), 594–603. doi:10.1080/07317115.2020.1836108 PMID:33124959
Canada, B., Stephan, Y., Sutin, A. R., & Terracciano, A. (2020). Personality and falls among older adults: Evidence
from a longitudinal cohort. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 75(9), 1905–1910. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbz040
PMID:30945733
Cangöz, B., Demirci, S., & Uluc, S. (2013). Trail Making Test: Predictive Validity Study On Turkish Patients With
Alzheimer Dementia. Turkish Journal of Geriatrics/Türk Geriatri Dergisi, 16(1).
Canovas, F., & Dagneaux, L. (2018). Quality of life after total knee arthroplasty. Orthopaedics & traumatology, surgery
& research. OTSR, 104(1, 1S), S41–S46. doi:10.1016/j.otsr.2017.04.017 PMID:29183821
CANTAB® [Cognitive assessment software]. (2019). Cognitive Cognition. All rights reserved. www.cantab.com
CANTAB® [Cognitive assessment software]. (2022). Alzheimer’s disease. https://www.cambridgecognition.com/cantab/
test-batteries/alzheimers-disease/
Cardoso, A. P. O., & Costa, L. M. A. C. (2006). Velhice e exclusão social: Um estudo no centro de convívio e apoio à
terceira idade do Tortosendo. Psychologica, 42, 89–114.
Carrilho, A. (2020). Perto de 1,4 milhões de pessoas em Portugal são cuidadores informais. Observador. https://observador.
pt/2020/11/05/perto-de-14-milhoes-de-pessoas-em-portugal-sao-cuidadores-informais/
Carta de Ottawa. (1986). Primeira Conferência Internacional sobre Promoção da Saúde. BVSMS. https://bvsms.saude.
gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/carta_ottawa.pdf
312
Compilation of References
Carvalho, P., & Dias, O. (2011). Adaptação dos idosos institucionalizados. Millenium, 40, 161–184.
Casagrande F., Torresen J. & Evi Zouganeli (2018). Sensor Event Prediction using Recurrent Neural Network in Smart
Homes for Older Adults (pp 662-668). 2018 International Conference on Intelligent Systems (IS). IEEE Access.
Cavanaugh, J. C., & Blanchard-Fields, F. (2006). Adult development and aging (5th ed.). Thomson Wadsworth.
CDCP - Centers for Disease Control and prevention. (2011). Ten Great Public Health Achievements-United States,
2001-2010. JAMA, 306(1), 36-38
Cesari, M., Kritchevsky, S. B., Penninx, B. W., Nicklas, B. J., Simonsick, E. M., Newman, A. B., Tylavsky, F. A., Brach,
J. S., Satterfield, S., Bauer, D. C., Visser, M., Rubin, S. M., Harris, T. B., & Pahor, M. (2005). Prognostic value of usual
gait speed in well-functioning older people—Results from the Health, Aging and Body Composition Study. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society, 53(10), 1675–1680. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53501.x PMID:16181165
Chandra, S., Ward, P., & Mohammadnezhad, M. (2019). Factors Associated With Patient Satisfaction in Outpatient Department
of Suva Sub-divisional Health Center, Fiji, 2018: A Mixed Method Study. Frontiers in Public Health, 7(JUL),
183. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2019.00183 PMID:31312630
Charernboon, T. (2019). Diagnostic accuracy of the Thai version of the Mini‐Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination as
a mild cognitive impairment and dementia screening test. Psychogeriatrics, 19(4), 340–344.
Chatterji, S., Byles, J., Cutler, D., Seeman, T., & Verdes, E. (2015). Health, functioning, and disability in older adults—
Present status and future implications. Lancet, 385(9967), 563–575. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61462-8 PMID:25468158
Chen, H., Li, M., Wang, J., Xue, C., Ding, T., Nong, X., Liu, Y., & Zhang, L. (2016). Factors influencing inpatients’
satisfaction with hospitalization service in public hospitals in Shanghai, People’s Republic of China. Patient Preference
and Adherence, 10, 469–477. doi:10.2147/PPA.S98095 PMID:27110101
Chew, S. M., Lee, J. H., Lim, S. F., Liew, M. J., Xu, Y., & Towle, R. M. (2021). Prevalence and predictors of medication
non‐adherence among older community‐dwelling people with chronic disease in Singapore. Journal of Advanced
Nursing, 77(10), 4069–4080. doi:10.1111/jan.14913 PMID:34061364
Cho, B. Y., Seo, D. C., Lin, H. C., Lohrmann, D. K., & Chomistek, A. K. (2018). BMI and central obesity with falls
among community-dwelling older adults. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 54(4), e59–e66. doi:10.1016/j.
amepre.2017.12.020 PMID:29433954
Choe, J. Y., Youn, J. C., Park, J. H., Park, I. S., Jeong, J. W., Lee, W. H., Lee, S. B., Park, Y. S., Jhoo, J. H., & Lee, D.
Y. (2008). The Severe Cognitive Impairment Rating Scale–an instrument for the assessment of cognition in moderate
to severe dementia patients. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 25(4), 321–328.
Choi, A., Kim, T., Yuhai, O., Jeong, S., Kim, K., Kim, H., & Mun, J. H. (2022). Deep Learning-Based Near-Fall Detection
Algorithm for Fall Risk Monitoring System Using a Single Inertial Measurement Unit (pp 2385-2394). IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 30, doi:10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3199068 PMID:35969550
Choi, E. (2015). Effects of a reminiscence program on depression, activities of daily living, and quality of life of older
adults in senior centers. Journal of Korean Academy of Nursing, 45(4), 565–575. doi:10.4040/jkan.2015.45.4.565
PMID:26364531
Choi, S. L., Kim, M., & McDonough, I. M. (2019). Do older adults with Alzheimer’s disease engage in estate planning
and advance care planning preparation? Aging & Mental Health, 23(7), 872–879. doi:10.1080/13607863.2018.146119
2 PMID:29667427
313
Compilation of References
Choi, S. L., McDonough, I. M., Kim, M., & Kim, G. (2019). Estate planning among older Americans: The moderating
role of race and ethnicity. Financial Planning Review, 2(3–4), e1058. doi:10.1002/cfp2.1058
Choi, Y. J., & Ra, H. J. (2016). Patient Satisfaction after Total Knee Arthroplasty. Knee Surgery & Related Research,
28(1), 1–15. doi:10.5792/ksrr.2016.28.1.1 PMID:26955608
Cho, S.-H. (2017). Effects of horseback riding exercise on the relative alpha power spectrum in the elderly. Archives of
Gerontology and Geriatrics, 70, 141–147. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2017.01.011 PMID:28135668
Cho, S.-H., Kim, J.-W., Kim, S.-R., & Cho, B.-J. (2015). Effects of horseback riding exercise therapy on hormone levels
in elderly persons. Journal of Physical Therapy Science, 27(7), 2271–2273. doi:10.1589/jpts.27.2271 PMID:26311966
Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R., & Vaupel, J. W. (2009). Ageing populations: The challenges ahead. Lancet,
374(9696), 1196–1208. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61460-4 PMID:19801098
Chu, L. W., Chiu, K. C., Hui, S. L., Yu, G. K., Tsui, W. J., & Lee, P. W. (2000). The reliability and validity of the Alzheimer’s
Disease Assessment Scale Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) among the elderly Chinese in Hong Kong. Annals
of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore, 29(4), 474–485.
Cibere, J., Bellamy, N., Thorne, A., Esdaile, J. M., McGorm, K. J., Chalmers, A., Huang, S., Peloso, P., Shojania, K.,
Singer, J., Wong, H., & Kopec, J. (2004). Reliability of the knee examination in osteoarthritis: Effect of standardization.
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 50(2), 458–468. doi:10.1002/art.20025 PMID:14872488
Collins, J. M. (2013). Analyzing the financial capability of people in Wisconsin. Issue Briefs: Family Financial Education,
2013-04.
Collins, N. J., Misra, D., Felson, D. T., Crossley, K. M., & Roos, E. M. (2011). Measures of knee function: International
Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) Subjective Knee Evaluation Form, Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome
Score (KOOS), Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score Physical Function Short Form (KOOS-PS), Knee Outcome
Survey Activities of Daily Living Scale (KOS-ADL), Lysholm Knee Scoring Scale, Oxford Knee Score (OKS),
Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC), Activity Rating Scale (ARS), and Tegner
Activity Score (TAS). Arthritis care & research, 63(11), S208–S228. doi:10.1002/acr.20632
Connor, D. J., & Sabbagh, M. N. (2008). Administration and scoring variance on the ADAS-Cog. Journal of Alzheimer’s
Disease, 15(3), 461–464.
Conrad, K. J., Iris, M., Ridings, J. W., Fairman, K. P., Rosen, A., & Wilber, K. H. (2011). Conceptual model and map
of financial exploitation of older adults. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 23(4), 304–325. doi:10.1080/08946566.20
11.584045 PMID:21978290
Conrad, K. J., Iris, M., Ridings, J. W., Langley, K., & Wilber, K. H. (2010). Self-report measure of financial exploitation
of older adults. The Gerontologist, 50(6), 758–773. doi:10.1093/geront/gnq054 PMID:20667945
Conrad, K. J., Matters, M. D., Luchins, D. J., Hanrahan, P., Quasius, D. L., & Lutz, G. (2006). Development of a money
mismanagement measure and cross-validation due to suspected range restriction. Journal of Applied Measurement, 7(2),
206–224. PMID:16632903
Constituição da República Portuguesa [Constitution of the Portuguese Republic]. (1976) Decreto de aprovação da Constituição.
Diário da República n.º 86.
Constituição da República Portuguesa. (2000). Livraria Almedina.
Cooney, C., Howard, R., & Lawlor, B. (2006). Abuse of vulnerable people with dementia by their carers: Can we identify
those most at risk? International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(6), 564–571. doi:10.1002/gps.1525 PMID:16783768
314
Compilation of References
Covey, H. C. (1992). The definitions of the beginning of old age in history. International Journal of Aging & Human
Development, 34(4), 325–337. doi:10.2190/GBXB-BE1F-1BU1-7FKK PMID:1607219
Creswell, J. W. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. Sage Pubications.
Crimmins, E. M. (2004). Trends in the health of the elderly. Annual Review of Public Health, 25(1), 79–98. doi:10.1146/
annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124401 PMID:15015913
Crimmins, E. M. (2020). Social hallmarks of aging: Suggestions for geroscience research. Ageing Research Reviews, 63,
101136. doi:10.1016/j.arr.2020.101136 PMID:32798771
Crimmins, E. M., & Beltrán-Sánchez, H. (2011). Mortality and morbidity trends: Is there compression of morbidity?
The Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66(1), 75–86. doi:10.1093/geronb/
gbq088 PMID:21135070
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. (2018). CASP (Systematic Literature). Check List.
Cummings, J. L., Tong, G., & Ballard, C. (2019). Treatment combinations for Alzheimer’s disease: Current and future
pharmacotherapy options. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 67(3), 779–794.
Daher, M., Diab, A., Najjar, M., Khalil, M., & Charpillet, F. (2017). Elder Tracking and Fall Detection System Using
Smart Tiles. IEEE Sensors Journal, 17(2).
Damásio, C. P. (2020). A formação de uma rede de ajuda mútua de pessoas com doença oncológica. In: Fialho, J. (Ed.)
(2020) Redes Sociais. Como compreendê-las? Uma Introdução à Análise de Redes Sociais. Sílabo.
Damásio, C. P., & Fontes, B. (2022). Social Networks Mediated by the Internet and Health Care. In: Sousa, M. J.; Marques,
C. G. (Ed.) Innovations and Social Media Analytics in a Digital Society. (1st. ed) CRC Press. doi:10.1201/9781003189848
Damásio, C. S. S. P. (2019). Do Blogue à Rede de Ajuda Mútua: Processo de Construção ao longo das Transições da Pessoa
com Doença Oncológica. [Nursing Doctoral Thesis, Lisbon: University of Lisbon] http://hdl.handle.net/10451/38933
Darzins, P., Molloy, W., & Strang, D. (2004). Who can decide?: The six step capacity assessment process. Memory
Australia Press.
Dautzenberg, G., Lijmer, J., & Beekman, A. (2020). Diagnostic accuracy of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)
for cognitive screening in old age psychiatry: Determining cutoff scores in clinical practice. Avoiding spectrum bias
caused by healthy controls. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 35(3), 261–269.
Davey, R. J., & Jamieson, S. (2004). The validity of using the mini mental state examination in NICE dementia guidelines.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 75(2), 343–344.
Davies, N., De Souza, T., Rait, G., Meehan, J., & Sampson, E. L. (2021). Developing an applied model for making decisions
towards the end of life about care for someone with dementia. PLoS One, 16(5), e0252464.
Davis, K. L., Price, C. C., Kaplan, E., & Libon, D. J. (2002). Error analysis of the nine-word California Verbal Learning
Test (CVLT-9) among older adults with and without dementia. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 16(1), 81–89.
De Jager, C., Blackwell, A. D., Budge, M. M., & Sahakian, B. J. (2005). Predicting cognitive decline in healthy older
adults. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13(8), 735–740.
Decision, No. 940/2011/EU, 14/09. Sobre o Ano Europeu do Envelhecimento Activo e da Solidariedade entre as Gerações
(2012). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/PT/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32011D0940&from=PT
315
Compilation of References
Decree-Law n.º 48/95, de 15 de março. (1995). Código Penal de 1982 versão consolidada posterior a 1995, atualizado
pela Lei n.º 110/2015, de 26 de agosto. Diário da República. https://www.pgdlisboa.pt/leis/lei_mostra_articulado.
php?nid=109&tabela=leis
Decree-Law Nr 101/2006, 06/06. Cria a Rede Nacional de Cuidados Continuados Integrados. Diário da República, 1ª
Série A, Nº 109, p. 3856 – 3865.
Decree-Law Nr 391/91, 10/10. Regime de Acolhimento Familiar de Idosos e Adultos com Deficiência. Diário da República,
1ª Série A, Nº 233, p. 5277 – 5281.
Decree-Law Nr 47344, 25/11. Código Civil Português. Diário do Governo Nº 274/1966.
Deković, M. (1999). Risk and protective factors in the development of problem behavior during adolescent. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 28(6), 667–685. doi:10.1023/A:1021635516758
Delgado, J., Jones, L., Bradley, M. C., Allan, L. M., Ballard, C., Clare, L., & Melzer, D. (2020). Potentially inappropriate
prescribing in dementia, multi-morbidity and incidence of adverse health outcomes. Age and Ageing. PMID:32946561
Dementia Australia. (2022). Tests used in diagnosing dementia. Dementia Australia. https://www.dementia.org.au/
national/about-dementia/how-can-i-find-out-more/tests-used-in-diagnosing-dementia
Dening, T., & Sandilyan, M. B. (2015). Dementia: definitions and types. Nursing Standard, 29(37), 37.
Deshpande, N., & Patla, A. E. (2007). Visual-vestibular interaction during goal directed locomotion: Effects of aging
and blurring vision. Experimental Brain Research, 176(1), 43–53. doi:10.100700221-006-0593-5 PMID:16847610
Desrosiers, J., Robichaud, L., Demers, L., Gélinas, I., Noreau, L., & Durand, D. (2009). Comparison and correlates of
participation in older adults without disabilities. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 49(3), 397–403. doi:10.1016/j.
archger.2008.12.006 PMID:19136161
DeWalt, N. C., Stahorsky, K. A., Sturges, S., Bena, J. F., Morrison, S. L., Drobnich Sulak, L., Szczepinski, L., & Albert,
N. M. (2023). Simulation Versus Written Fall Prevention Education in Older Hospitalized Adults: A Randomized Controlled
Study. Clinical Nursing Research, 32(2), 278–287. doi:10.1177/10547738221082192 PMID:35291853
Dias, G., & Couceiro, M. S. (2017a). Active Ageing and Physical Activity: Guidelines, Functional Exercises and Recommendations.
Springer International Publishing. , doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6
Dias, G., Mendes, P. C., & Mendes, R. (2015). Gerontomotricidade e psicomotricidade. In Gerontomotricidade: actividades
lúdicas e pedagógicas para o corpo envelhecido, 1-27. Coimbra, Portugal: ESEC
Dias, G., Mendes, R., Serra e Silva, P., & Braquinho, A. (2015). Envelhecimento Activo: aplicações práticas. In Envelhecimento
Activo e Actividade Física, 103-103. Coimbra, Portugal: ESE.IPC.
Dias, G.; & Mendes, R. (2013). Actividade física para a terceira idade. Edição: Escola Superior de Educação de Coimbra.
Dias, G.; & Mendes, R., & Serra e Silva (2014). Envelhecimento activo e actividade física. Edição: Escola Superior de
Educação de Coimbra.
Dias, G. (2022). Active or Healthy Ageing: “A Wonderful Journey between Body, Cognition and Emotion. European Journal
of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education, 12(6), 534–535. doi:10.3390/ejihpe12060039 PMID:35735460
Dias, G., & Couceiro, M. S. (2017). Activity Programmes for the Elderly. Springer International Publishing., doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-52063-6_3
316
Compilation of References
Dias, G., Couceiro, M. S., Serra e Silva, P., Castro, M., Branquinho, A., Mendes, R., & Carvalho, I. (2017). Introduction:
New Paradigms of Active Ageing. In Active Ageing and Physical Activity Guidelines, Functional Exercises and Recommendations
(pp. 1–19). Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6_1
Dias, G., Felício, J., & Mendes, R. (2015). Musicoterapia e envelhecimento activo. In Gerontomotricidade: actividades
lúdicas e pedagógicas para o corpo envelhecido (pp. 29–46). ESEC.
Dias, G., Mendes, P. C., & Almeida, M. (2017). Physical Activity Benefits in Active Ageing. In Active Ageing and Physical
Activity: Guidelines, Functional Exercises and Recommendations (pp. 21–34). Springer International Publishing.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-52063-6_2
Dias, G., Mendes, P. C., & Mendes, R. (2015). Gerontomotricidade e psicomotricidade. In Gerontomotricidade: actividades
lúdicas e pedagógicas para o corpo envelhecido (pp. 1–27). ESEC.
Dias, G., Mendes, R., & Vasconcelos, O. (2016). Jogos Tradicionais Portugueses – abordagem pedagógica e aplicações
práticas. In Jogos e Brinquedos Populares: Tradição, Património e Legado (pp. 15–22). Escola Superior de Educação
de Coimbra.
Dias, I. (2004). A violência sobre as mulheres e os idosos. Psychologica, 36, 33–61.
Diniz, L. H., de Mello, E. C., Ribeiro, M. F., Lage, J. B., Bevilacqua Júnior, D. E., Ferreira, A. A., Ferraz, M. L., Rosa, R.
C., Teixeira, V. P. A., & Espindula, A. P. (2020). Impact of hippotherapy for balance improvement and flexibility in elderly
people. Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies, 24(2), 92–97. doi:10.1016/j.jbmt.2019.10.002 PMID:32507159
Direção Geral da Saúde. (2023). Obesidade. SNS24. https://www.sns24.gov.pt/tema/doencas-cronicas/obesidade/#quaissao-
as-causas-da-obesidade
Direção Geral de Saúde. (2017). Estratégia Nacional para o Envelhecimento Ativo e Saudável 2017-2025. Proposta do
Grupo de Trabalho Interministerial (Despacho n.º 12427/2016). Lisboa.
Direção-Geral de Saúde. (2016). Violência Interpessoal - Abordagem, Diagnóstico e Intervenção nos Serviços de Saúde
(2ª Edição). Lisboa.
Distefano, S., Merlino, G., & Puliafito, A. (2012). Sensing and Actuation as a Service: A New Development for Clouds
(pp. 272-275). 2012 IEEE 11th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications. IEEE.
Dixon, L., Turner, J., Krauss, N., Scott, J., & McNary, S. (1999). Case managers’ and clients’ perspectives on a representative
payee program. Psychiatric Services (Washington, D.C.), 50(6), 781–786. doi:10.1176/ps.50.6.781 PMID:10375147
Dodds, R. M., Syddall, H. E., Cooper, R., Benzeval, M., Deary, I. J., Dennison, E. M., Der, G., Gale, C. R., Inskip, H.
M., & Jagger, C. (2014). Grip strength across the life course: Normative data from twelve British studies. PLoS One,
9(12), e113637.
Dodig, S., Čepelak, I., & Pavić, I. (2019). Hallmarks of senescence and aging. Biochemia medica. Biochemia Medica,
29(3), 483–497. doi:10.11613/BM.2019.030501 PMID:31379458
Donaldson, P. J., Grey, A. C., Heilman, B. M., Lim, J. C., & Vaghefi, E. (2017). The physiological optics of the lens.
Progress in Retinal and Eye Research, 56, e1–e24. doi:10.1016/j.preteyeres.2016.09.002 PMID:27639549
Downing, L. J., Caprio, T. V., & Lyness, J. M. (2013). Geriatric psychiatry review: Differential diagnosis and treatment
of the 3 D’s-delirium, dementia, and depression. Current Psychiatry Reports, 15(6), 1–10.
317
Compilation of References
Drake, S. A., Conway, S. H., Yang, Y., Cheatham, L. S., Wolf, D. A., Adams, S. D., Wade, C. E., & Holcomb, J. B.
(2021). When falls become fatal—Clinical care sequence. PLoS One, 16(1), e0244862. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0244862
PMID:33406164
Dreer, L. E., DeVivo, M. J., Novack, T. A., & Marson, D. C. (2012). Financial capacity following traumatic brain injury:
A six-month longitudinal study. Rehabilitation Psychology, 57(1), 5–12. doi:10.1037/a0025818 PMID:22369113
Drenth‐van Maanen, A. C., Wilting, I., & Jansen, P. A. (2020). Prescribing medicines to older people—How to consider
the impact of ageing on human organ and body functions. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 86(10), 1921–1930.
doi:10.1111/bcp.14094 PMID:31425638
Drima, E. P. (2022). Routine use of financial capacity instruments for clinical decisional capacity testing: A scoping review.
Drolet, V., Vallet, G. T., Imbeault, H., Lecomte, S., Limoges, F., Joubert, S., & Rouleau, I. (2014). A comparison of the
performances between healthy older adults and persons with Alzheimer’s disease on the Rey auditory verbal learning
test and the Test de rappel libre/rappel indicé 16 items. Gériatrie et Psychologie Neuropsychiatrie du Vieillissement,
12(2), 218–226.
Dunbar, M. J., Richardson, G., & Robertsson, O. (2013). I can’t get no satisfaction after my total knee replacement:
Rhymes and reasons. The Bone & Joint Journal, 95-B(11, Suppl A), 148–152. doi:10.1302/0301-620X.95B11.32767
PMID:24187375
Earnst, K. S., Wadley, V. G., Aldridge, T. M., Steenwyk, A. B., Hammond, A. E., Harrell, L. E., & Marson, D. C. (2001).
Loss of financial capacity in Alzheimer’s disease: The role of working memory. Neuropsychology, Development, and
Cognition. Section B, Aging, Neuropsychology and Cognition, 8(2), 109–119. doi:10.1076/anec.8.2.109.839
Égerházi, A., Berecz, R., Bartók, E., & Degrell, I. (2007). Automated Neuropsychological Test Battery (CANTAB) in
mild cognitive impairment and in Alzheimer’s disease. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry,
31(3), 746–751.
Eklund, H.-T. (2015). “I felt like being Mozart” - Process drama in Teaching Music History in Finnish [“Tunne oli
kuin Mozartilla välillä” - Prosessidraama musiikinhistorian opetuksessa]. Jyväskylä University (https://jyx.jyu.fi/
handle/123456789/46420)
Eklund, P. (2021). Information and Process in Health. In P. Eklund (Ed.), Integrated Care and Fall Prevention in Active
and Healthy Aging (pp. 263–279). IGI Global. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch015.
Eklund, P. (2021). Integrated Care in Prevention: Maturity and Upscaling. In the book Eklund P. (editor) Integrated Care
and Fall Prevention in Active and Healthy Ageing, pp. 250-262. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-4411-2.ch014
Eklund, P., Gutiérrez García, J., Höhle, U., & Kortelainen, J. (2018). Semigroups in complete lattices : Quantales, modules
and related topics. Developments in Mathematics 54. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-78948-4
Eklund, P., Gutiérrez García, J., Höhle, U., & Kortelainen, J. (2018). Semigroups in Complete Lattices: Quantales,
Modules and Related Topics. Developments in Mathematics, 54, Springer.
Eklund, H.-T., & Eklund, P. (2013). In R. B. Thorkelsdóttir & Á. H. Ragnardóttir (Eds.), Logic and process drama.
FLíSS - Drama Boreale, Earth-Air-Water-Fire (pp. 103–115). Háskólaprent.
Eklund, H.-T., & Eklund, P. (2014). Process drama based information management for assessment and classification in
learning. In W. Pedrycz & S. M. Chen (Eds.), Social Networks: A Framework of Computational Intelligence. Studies in
Computational Intelligence (Vol. 526). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02993-1_15
318
Compilation of References
Eklund, P. (2016). In M. M. Cruz-Cunha & I. Miranda (Eds.), Lative logic accomodating the WHO Family of International
Classifications. Encyclopedia of E-Health and Telemedicine (pp. 661–673). IGI Global.
Eklund, P., Galán, M. A., Helgesson, R., & Kortelainen, J. (2014). Fuzzy terms. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 256, 211–235.
doi:10.1016/j.fss.2013.02.012
Elbogen, E. B., Wilder, C., Swartz, M. S., & Swanson, J. W. (2008). Caregivers as money managers for adults with severe
mental illness: How treatment providers can help. Academic Psychiatry, 32(2), 104–110. doi:10.1176/appi.ap.32.2.104
PMID:18349329
Elwood, R. W. (1995). The California Verbal Learning Test: Psychometric characteristics and clinical application.
Neuropsychology Review, 5(3), 173–201.
Engel, G. L. (1977). The need for a new medical model: A challenge for biomedicine. Science, 196(4286), 129–136.
doi:10.1126cience.847460 PMID:847460
Entidade Reguladora da Saúde (ERS). (2022). Informação de Monitorização. Rede Nacional de Cuidados Continuados
Integrados. ERS. https://ipss-acaso.org/centro-recursos-online/download-documento/21
Epstein-Lubow, G., & Fulton, A. T. (2012). Post-hospital transitions for individuals with moderate to severe cognitive
impairment. The Annals of Long-Term Care: the Official Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 20(3).
Escobar, A., Quintana, J. M., Bilbao, A., Aróstegui, I., Lafuente, I., & Vidaurreta, I. (2007). Responsiveness and clinically
important differences for the WOMAC and SF-36 after total knee replacement. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 15(3),
273–280. doi:10.1016/j.joca.2006.09.001 PMID:17052924
Etters, L., Goodall, D., & Harrison, B. E. (2008). Caregiver burden among dementia patient caregivers: A review of the
literature. In Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. doi:10.1111/j.1745-7599.2008.00342.x
European Commission. (2021). The European Pillar of Social Rights in 20 principles. EC. https://commission.europa.
eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/economy-works-people/jobs-growth-and-investment/european-pillar-socialrights/
european-pillar-social-rights-20-principles_en
Eurostat. (2023). Statistics Explained: Population structure and ageing. Eurostat. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statisticsexplained/
index.php?title=Population_structure_and_ageing
Evans, T. E., Adams, H. H. H., Licher, S., Wolters, F. J., van der Lugt, A., Ikram, M. K., O’Sullivan, M. J., Vernooij,
M. W., & Ikram, M. A. (2018). Subregional volumes of the hippocampus in relation to cognitive function and risk of
dementia. NeuroImage, 178, 129–135.
Faggion, C. M. Jr, Liu, J., Huda, F., & Atieh, M. (2014). Assessment of the quality of reporting in abstracts of systematic
reviews with meta-analyses in periodontology and implant dentistry. Journal of Periodontal Research, 49(2), 137–142.
doi:10.1111/jre.12092 PMID:23668725
Fairhall, N., Sherrington, C., Kurrle, S. E., Lord, S. R., & Cameron, I. D. (2011). ICF participation restriction is common
in frail, community-dwelling older people: An observational cross-sectional study. Physiotherapy, 97(1), 26–32.
doi:10.1016/j.physio.2010.06.008 PMID:21295235
Fang, J., Liu, L., & Fang, P. (2019). What is the most important factor affecting patient satisfaction - a study based on
gamma coefficient. Patient Preference and Adherence, 13, 515–525. doi:10.2147/PPA.S197015 PMID:31114168
Faragher, R. G., McArdle, A., Willows, A., & Ostler, E. L. (2017). Senescence in the aging process. F1000 Research,
6. PMID:28781767
319
Compilation of References
Fard, E. K., Keelor, J. L., Bagheban, A. A., & Keith, R. W. (2016). Comparison of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test
(RAVLT) and digit test among typically achieving and gifted students. Iranian Journal of Child Neurology, 10(2), 26.
Fasnacht, J. S., Wueest, A. S., Berres, M., Thomann, A. E., Krumm, S., Gutbrod, K., Steiner, L. A., Goettel, N., &
Monsch, A. U. (2022). Conversion between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and the Mini‐Mental Status Examination.
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society.
Fazio, S. (2013). The individual is the core and key to person-centered care. Generations (San Francisco, Calif.), 37(3),
16–22.
Feldman, M., Edwards, C., Wong, A., Randolph, J., Woleben, C., Nguyen, A., & ... . (2022). The Role for Simulation
in Professional Identity Formation in Medical Students. Simulation in Healthcare, 17(1), e8–e13. doi:10.1097/
SIH.0000000000000583
Felson, D. T. (1992). Obesity and osteoarthritis of the knee. Bulletin on the Rheumatic Diseases, 41(2), 6–7. PMID:1600446
Ferreira, D., & Dias, P. (2016). História de Portugal. Verso da Kapa. https://research.unl.pt/ws/portalfiles/portal/3381604/
CHAM_Paulo_Dias_Fiogo_Ferreira_embargo_18_meses.pdf
Ferrucci, L., Guralnik, J. M., Cecchi, F., Marchionni, N., Salani, B., Kasper, J., Celli, R., Giardini, S., Heikkinen, E.,
Jylhä, M., & Baroni, A. (1998). Constant hierarchic patterns of physical functioning across seven populations in five
countries. The Gerontologist, 38(3), 286–294. doi:10.1093/geront/38.3.286 PMID:9640848
Feyereisen, P., Gendron, M., & Seron, X. (1999). Disorders of everyday actions in subjects suffering from senile dementia
of Alzheimer’s type: An analysis of dressing performance. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 9(2), 169–188.
doi:10.1080/713755598
Fichman, H. C., Dias, L. B. T., Fernandes, C. S., Lourenço, R., Caramelli, P., & Nitrini, R. (2010). Normative data and
construct validity of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in a Brazilian elderly population. Psychology & Neuroscience,
3, 79–84.
Filbay, S. R., Judge, A., Delmestri, A., Arden, N. K., Altman, D., Beard, D., Carr, A., Cooper, C., Culliford, D., Griffin, T.,
Javaid, K., Latham, J., Murray, D., Pinedo-Villanueva, R., Price, A., & Prieto-Alhambra, D.COASt Study Group. (2018).
Evaluating Patients’ Expectations from a Novel Patient-Centered Perspective Predicts Knee Arthroplasty Outcome. The
Journal of Arthroplasty, 33(7), 2146–2152.e4. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2018.02.026 PMID:29544972
Fink, H. A., Jutkowitz, E., McCarten, J. R., Hemmy, L. S., Butler, M., Davila, H., Ratner, E., Calvert, C., Barclay, T. R.,
& Brasure, M. (2018). Pharmacologic interventions to prevent cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment, and clinical
Alzheimer-type dementia: A systematic review. Annals of Internal Medicine, 168(1), 39–51.
Foccillo, G. (2020). The Infections Causing Acute Respiratory Failure in Elderly Patients. In Ventilatory Support and
Oxygen Therapy in Elder, Palliative and End-of-Life Care Patients (pp. 35–45). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-26664-6_5
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975). “Mini-mental state”: A practical method for grading the cognitive
state of patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12(3), 189–198. doi:10.1016/0022-3956(75)90026-6
PMID:1202204
Fortino, G., Russo, W., Savaglio, C., Viroli, M., & Zhou, M. (2017). Modeling Opportunistic IoT Services in Open IoT
Ecosystems. In the 18th Workshop “From Objects to Agents,” Calabria, Italy.
Fox, L. S., Olin, J. T., Erblich, J., Ippen, C. G., & Schneider, L. S. (1998). Severity of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s
disease affects list learning using the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT). International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
13(8), 544–549.
320
Compilation of References
Freedman, V. A., Martin, L. G., Schoeni, R. F., & Cornman, J. C. (2008). Declines in late-life disability: the role of
early- and mid-life factors. Social science & medicine (1982), 66(7), 1588–1602. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2007.11.037
Freytag, G. (1900). Technique of the Drama: An Exposition of Dramatic Composition and Art (3rd ed.). Scott, Foresman
and company.
Fries, J. F., Bruce, B., & Chakravarty, E. (2011). Compression of morbidity 1980-2011: A focused review of paradigms
and progress. Journal of Aging Research, 261702, 1–10. doi:10.4061/2011/261702 PMID:21876805
Frilund, M., Fagerström, L., Eriksson, K., & Eklund, P. (2013). Assessment of ethical ideals and ethical manners in care
of older people. Nursing Research and Practice. Article ID, 374132, 1–11. doi:10.1155/2013/374132 PMID:23577242
Fritz, S., & Lusardi, M. (2009). White paper: “walking speed: the sixth vital sign”. Journal of geriatric physical therapy
(2001), 32(2), 46–49.
Fuller-Thomson, E., Ferreirinha, J., & Ahlin, K. M. (2023). Temporal Trends (from 2008 to 2017) in Functional Limitations
and Limitations in Activities of Daily Living: Findings from a Nationally Representative Sample of 5.4 Million
Older Americans. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 20(3), 2665. doi:10.3390/
ijerph20032665 PMID:36768031
Gaddam, A., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., & Grupta, G. S. (2011). Elder Care Based on Cognitive Sensor Network. IEEE
Sensors Journal, 11(3).
Gaddam, A., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., & Grupta, G. S. (2010). Towards the Development of a Cognitive Sensors Networkbased
Home for Elder Care (pp 484-491). 2010 Sixth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications.
IEEE. 10.1109/ICWMC.2010.93
Gadelha, A. B., Neri, S. G. R., Bottaro, M., & Lima, R. M. (2018). The relationship between muscle quality and incidence
of falls in older community-dwelling women: An 18-month follow-up study. Experimental Gerontology, 110, 241–246.
doi:10.1016/j.exger.2018.06.018 PMID:29935953
Gaggioli, A., Morganti, L., Bonfiglio, S., Scaratti, C., Cipresso, P., Serino, S., & Riva, G. (2014). Intergenerational group
reminiscence: A potentially effective intervention to enhance elderly psychosocial wellbeing and to improve children’s
perception of aging. Educational Gerontology, 40(7), 486–498. doi:10.1080/03601277.2013.844042
Gallagher-Thompson, D., Coon, D. W., Solano, N., Ambler, C., Rabinowitz, Y., & Thompson, L. W. (2003). Change in
indices of distress among Latino and Anglo female caregivers of elderly relatives with dementia: Site-specific results from
the REACH national collaborative study. The Gerontologist, 43(4), 580–591. doi:10.1093/geront/43.4.580 PMID:12937336
Ganz, D. A., & Latham, N. K. (2020). Prevention of falls in community dwelling older adults. The New England Journal
of Medicine, 382, 734–743.
García-Herranz, S., Díaz-Mardomingo, M. del C., Suárez-Falcón, J. C., Rodríguez-Fernández, R., Peraita, H., & Venero,
C. (2022). Normative data for the Spanish version of the California Verbal Learning Test (TAVEC) from older adults.
Psychological Assessment, 34(1), 91.
Gates, N. J., Vernooij, R. W. M., Di Nisio, M., Karim, S., March, E., Martínez, G., & Rutjes, A. W. S. (2019). Computerised
cognitive training for preventing dementia in people with mild cognitive impairment. In Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD012279.pub2
Gazibara, T., Kurtagic, I., Kisic‐Tepavcevic, D., Nurkovic, S., Kovacevic, N., Gazibara, T., & Pekmezovic, T. (2017).
Falls, risk factors and fear of falling among persons older than 65 years of age. Psychogeriatrics, 17(4), 215–223.
doi:10.1111/psyg.12217 PMID:28130862
321
Compilation of References
GBD. (2019). Diseases and Injuries Collaborators Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and
territories, 1990–2019: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet, 396, 1204–1222.
Gemmill, M. (2019). Research note: Chronic Disease Management in Europe. Brussels: European Commission.
Genêt, F., Schnitzler, A., Lapeyre, E., Roche, N., Autret, K., Fermanian, C., & Poiraudeau, S. (2008). Change of impairment,
disability and patient satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty in secondary care practice. Annales de readaptation
et de medecine physique: revue scientifique de la Societe francaise de reeducation fonctionnelle de readaptation et de
medecine physique, 51(8), 671–682. doi:10.1016/j.annrmp.2008.08.002
Georgiadou, V. A., & Maditinos, D. (2017). Measuring the Quality of Health Services Provided at a Greek Public Hospital
through Patient Satisfaction. Case Study: The General Hospital of Kavala. Quality Management EJournal, 10(2),
60–72. doi:10.25103/ijbesar.102.06
Gérin-Lajoie, M., Richards, C. L., & McFadyen, B. J. (2006). The circumvention of obstacles during walking in different
environmental contexts: A comparison between older and younger adults. Gait & Posture, 24(3), 364–369. doi:10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2005.11.001 PMID:16337384
Ghotbabadi, A. R., Feiz, S., & Baharun, R. (2015). Service Quality Measurements: A Review. International Journal of
Academic Research in Business & Social Sciences, 5(2). doi:10.6007/IJARBSS/v5-i2/1484
Giannouli, V. (2019). Judging Antigone in old age: (Neuro) psychology and law in the twenty‐first century. Problems
of Psychology in the 21st Century, 3, 72-74.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2019b). Depression and financial capacity assessment in Parkinson’s disease with dementia:
Overlooking an important factor?. Psychiatrike= Psychiatriki, 30(1), 66-70.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022j). Elder financial abuse and the COVID-19 pandemic: A call to action through training
programmes?. Psychiatrike= Psychiatriki, 33(4), 333-334.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2023b). Stressful life events, general cognitive performance, and financial capacity in
healthy older adults and Alzheimer’s disease patients. Neuropsychiatrie.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. How well do amyloid β peptide 1–42 (Aβ42), total tau and phosphorylated tau concentrations
in cerebrospinal fluid predict financial capacity in dementia? Submitted.
Giannouli, V. (2014). What do Greeks believe about elders and mental capacity. AGORA International Journal of Juridical
Sciences, 3(3), 1–5. doi:10.15837/aijjs.v8i3.1446
Giannouli, V. (2016). Crime and legal issues among intellectually disabled individuals. In R. Gopalan (Ed.), Handbook
of research on diagnosing, treating, and managing intellectual disabilities (pp. 346–369). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0089-6.ch018
Giannouli, V. (2017a). Alzheimer’s disease: Psychosocial dimensions of a modern plague. Encephalos, 54, 33–38.
Giannouli, V. (2017b). What is the next small big thing in psychology? Psychological Thought, 10(1), 1–6. doi:10.5964/
psyct.v10i1.215
Giannouli, V. (2018). Elder abuse and consent capacity: Our collective nemesis? In R. Gopalan (Ed.), Social, psychological,
and forensic perspectives on sexual abuse (pp. 207–221). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-3958-2.ch015
Giannouli, V. (2020). Et in Arcadia ego. Philosophy Now, 138, 32–33.
322
Compilation of References
Giannouli, V. (2022a). Reflecting on crime and legal issues in people with intellectual disabilities: Theory, perspectives,
and future approaches. In R. Gopalan (Ed.), Research anthology on physical and intellectual disabilities in an inclusive
society (pp. 1539–1567). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-6684-3542-7.ch081
Giannouli, V. (2022b). Does higher prevalence of frailty in Greek older community-dwelling women also relate to higher
prevalence of perceived financial exploitation? A new question to ponder upon. The Journal of Frailty & Aging, 11(4),
436–437. PMID:36346732
Giannouli, V. (2022c). Elder abuse and victims with disabilities. In R. T. Gopalan (Ed.), Victimology (pp. 313–339).
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-12930-8_14
Giannouli, V., Stamovlasis, D., & Tsolaki, M. (2018). Exploring the role of cognitive factors in a new instrument for
elders’ financial capacity assessment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 62(4), 1579–1594. doi:10.3233/JAD-170812
PMID:29504530
Giannouli, V., Stamovlasis, D., & Tsolaki, M. (2022). Longitudinal study of depression on amnestic mild cognitive
impairment and financial capacity. Clinical Gerontologist, 45(3), 708–714. doi:10.1080/07317115.2021.2017377
PMID:34983334
Giannouli, V., Tegos, T., Zilakaki, M., & Tsolaki, M. (2019). Elders and mental capacity: Using a qualitative approach to
examine views on independence and protection across the Balkans. Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 22, 122–139.
PMID:31802052
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2014). Legal capacity of the elderly in Greece. Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine,
17, 2–6. PMID:24392459
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2015). A neglected drama for elders: Discrepancy between self-perception and objective
performance regarding financial capacity in patients with cognitive deficits. Psychological Thought, 8(2), 142–147.
doi:10.5964/psyct.v8i2.130
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2016). Questions about dementia with Lewy bodies, personal beliefs and real performance
for financial capacity tasks. European Psychiatry, 33(S1), S469–S470. doi:10.1016/j.eurpsy.2016.01.1712
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2019a). Are left angular gyrus and amygdala volumes important for financial capacity in
mild cognitive impairment? Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 22, 160–164. PMID:30877733
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021a). Mild Alzheimer Disease, financial capacity, and the role of depression: Eyes
wide shut? Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 35(4), 360–362. doi:10.1097/WAD.0000000000000427
PMID:33443873
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021b). Is depression or apathy playing a key role in predicting financial capacity in Parkinson’s
Disease with Dementia and Frontotemporal Dementia? Brain Sciences, 11(6), 785. doi:10.3390/brainsci11060785
PMID:34198487
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021c). Vascular dementia, depression, and financial capacity assessment. Alzheimer
Disease and Associated Disorders, 35(1), 84–87. doi:10.1097/WAD.0000000000000374 PMID:32366802
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021d). Unraveling Ariadne’s thread into the labyrinth of aMCI: Depression and financial
capacity. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 35(4), 363–365. doi:10.1097/WAD.0000000000000417
PMID:33136558
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021e). Financial capacity and illiteracy: Does education matter in amnestic Mild Cognitive
Impairment? Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 5(1), 715–719. doi:10.3233/ADR-210033 PMID:34755045
323
Compilation of References
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2021f). APOE ɛ4 allele and financial capacity performance in Mild Alzheimer’s Disease:
A pilot study. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 5(1), 93–97. doi:10.3233/ADR-200254 PMID:33681721
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022a). Frontotemporal dementia and financial capacity: Facing the Cerberus of overestimation
or underestimation? Australasian Psychiatry, 30(1), 41–43. doi:10.1177/10398562211005444 PMID:33818175
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022b). Self-awareness of cognitive efficiency, cognitive status, insight, and financial
capacity in patients with mild AD, aMCI, and healthy controls: An intriguing liaison with clinical implications? Neurology
International, 14(3), 628–637. doi:10.3390/neurolint14030051 PMID:35997360
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022c). Is negative affect associated with deficits in financial capacity in nondepressed
older adults? A preliminary study. Journal of Affective Disorders Reports, 10, 100391. doi:10.1016/j.jadr.2022.100391
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022d). Financial incapacity of patients with mild Alzheimer’s Disease: What neurologists
need to know about where the impairment lies. Neurology International, 14(1), 90–98. doi:10.3390/neurolint14010008
PMID:35076597
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022e). Liberating older adults from the bonds of vascular risk factors: What is their impact
on financial capacity in amnestic mild cognitive impairment? Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 76(6), 246–250.
doi:10.1111/pcn.13348 PMID:35262231
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022f). (in press). In the hands of Hypnos: Associations between sleep, cognitive performance
and financial capacity in aMCI and mild AD. Sleep Science.
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022g). What biological factors, social determinants, and psychological and behavioral
symptoms of patients with mild Alzheimer’s Disease correlate with caregiver estimations of financial capacity? Bringing
biases against older women into focus. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 6(1), 503–507. doi:10.3233/ADR-
220037 PMID:36186725
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022h). Neuropsychological performance and engagement in estate planning and advance
care planning preparation of patients with neurocognitive disorders and healthy older adults: Is the situation alarming or
reassuring in Greece? Gerontology & Geriatric Medicine, 8, 23337214221119053. doi:10.1177/23337214221119053
PMID:36046580
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2022i). Neurocognitive disorders and financial capacity: A few steps away for financial
generosity and self-justification statements to be used in the diagnosis of brain pathology in old age? Psychiatry and
Clinical Neurosciences, 77(1), 56–57. doi:10.1111/pcn.13493 PMID:36256510
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2023a). Beneath the top of the iceberg: Financial capacity deficits in mixed dementia with
and without depression. Health Care, 11(4), 505. PMID:36833039
Giannouli, V., & Tsolaki, M. (2023c). Is there a specific order of appearance of financial capacity deficits across neurocognitive
disorders? What comes first and what should be treated. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 38(2),
e5880. doi:10.1002/gps.5880 PMID:36710426
Gião, N. D., Pereira, J. A. R., & Castelo Branco, M. (2020). Analysis of the Methodologues Apllied in the Study of the
Prevalence of Arterial Hypertension in Portugal. Revista Portuguesa de Hipertensão e Risco Cardiovascular, 79, 15 - 25.
https://www.sphta.org.pt/files/sphta_79_2020_0910.pdf
Giesinger, J. M., Hamilton, D. F., Jost, B., Behrend, H., & Giesinger, K. (2015). WOMAC, EQ-5D and Knee Society
Score Thresholds for Treatment Success After Total Knee Arthroplasty. The Journal of Arthroplasty, 30(12), 2154–2158.
doi:10.1016/j.arth.2015.06.012 PMID:26160647
324
Compilation of References
Gil, A. P., Fernandes, A. F., Nicolau, R., & Santos, A. J. (2013). Prevalência da Violência contra as pessoas idosas – Uma
revisão crítica da literatura. Sociologia. Problemas e Práticas, 72, 53–77.
Gil, A. P., Kislaya, I., Santos, A. J., Nunes, B., Nicolau, R., & Fernandes, A. A. (2015). Elder abuse in Portugal: Findings
from the first national prevalence study. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 27(3), 174–195. doi:10.1080/0894656
6.2014.953659 PMID:25122109
Gill, M., Andersen, E., & Hilsmann, N. (2019). Best practices for teaching pharmacology to undergraduate nursing
students: A systematic review of the literature. Nurse Education Today, 74, 15–24.
Gill, S., Blair, M., Kershaw, M., Jesso, S., MacKinley, J., Coleman, K., Pantazopoulos, K., Pasternak, S., & Finger, E.
(2019). Financial capacity in frontotemporal dementia and related presentations. Journal of Neurology, 266(7), 1698–1707.
doi:10.100700415-019-09317-w PMID:31011799
Gill, T. M., Guo, Z., & Allore, H. G. (2006). The epidemiology of bathing disability in older persons. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 54(10), 1524–1530. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00890.x PMID:17038069
Gill, T. M., Han, L., & Allore, H. G. (2007). Bath aids and the subsequent development of bathing disability in
community-living older persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 55(11), 1757–1763. doi:10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2007.01421.x PMID:17916117
Gill, T. M., Robison, J. T., & Tinetti, M. E. (1998). Difficulty and dependence: Two components of the disability continuum
among community-living older persons. Annals of Internal Medicine, 128(2), 96–101. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-
128-2-199801150-00004 PMID:9441588
Glisky, E. L. (2007). Changes in cognitive function in human aging. In D. R. Riddle (Ed.), Brain aging: Models, methods,
and mechanisms (pp. 4–20). CRC Press.
Glosser, G., Gallo, J., Duda, N., de Vries, J. J., Clark, C. M., & Grossman, M. (2002). Visual perceptual functions predict
instrumental activities of daily living in patients with dementia. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral
Neurology, 15(3), 198–206. PMID:12218713
Goel, V., Grafman, J., Sadato, N., & Hallett, M. (1995). Modeling other minds. Neuroreport, 6(13), 1741–1746.
doi:10.1097/00001756-199509000-00009 PMID:8541472
Góis, P., & Marques, J. C. (2018). Retrato de um Portugal Migrante: a evolução da emigração, da imigração e do seu
estudo nos últimos 40 anos. Open Edition. https://journals.openedition.org/eces/3307
Gómez, L., Pérez, M., & Vila, J. (2001). Problemática actual del apoyo social y su relación con la salud: Una revisión.
Psicología Conductual, 9(1), 5–30.
Gonzalez, C., Tommasi, N. S., Briggs, D., Properzi, M. J., Amariglio, R. E., & Marshall, G. A. (2021). Financial capacity
and regional cerebral Tau in cognitively normal older adults, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer’s Disease
Dementia. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 79(3), 1133–1142. doi:10.3233/JAD-201122 PMID:33386806
Goudy, L. S., Rigby, B. R., Silliman-French, L., & Becker, K. A. (2019). Effects of Simulated Horseback Riding on Balance,
Postural Sway, and Quality of Life in Older Adults With Parkinson’s Disease. Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly;
APAQ, 36(4), 413–430. doi:10.1123/apaq.2019-0008 PMID:31323643
Government of the Republic of North Macedonia (GRNM). (2021). Resolution on migration policy of the Republic of
North Macedonia 2021-2025. GRNM. https://north-macedonia.iom.int/sites/g/files/tmzbdl316/files/documents/Resolution%
20on%20Migration%20Policy%20of%20The%20Republic%20of%20North%20Macedonia.pdf
325
Compilation of References
Graham, J. E., Ostir, G. V., Fisher, S. R., & Ottenbacher, K. J. (2008). Assessing walking speed in clinical research: A
systematic review. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 14(4), 552–562. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2753.2007.00917.x
PMID:18462283
Greene, A. J. (2022). Elder financial abuse and electronic financial instruments: Present and future considerations
for financial capacity assessments. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 30(1), 90–106. doi:10.1016/j.
jagp.2021.02.045 PMID:33781661
Greer, S. L., Lynch, J., Reeves, A., Façkenbach, M., Gingrich, J., Cylus, J., & Bambra, C. (2021). Ageing and Health.
The Politics of Better Policies. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108973236
Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Sicola, A., Krzywanski, S., Zamrini, E., Harrell, L., & Marson, D. C. (2003). Impaired financial
abilities in mild cognitive impairment: A direct assessment approach. Neurology, 60(3), 449–457. doi:10.1212/
WNL.60.3.449 PMID:12578926
Griffith, H. R., Okonkwo, O. C., Den Hollander, J. A., Belue, K., Lanza, S., Harrell, L. E., Brockington, J. C., Clark,
D. G., & Marson, D. C. (2007). Brain Proton MRS is correlated with financial abilities in patients with Alzheimer’s
Disease. Brain Imaging and Behavior, 1(1), 23–29. doi:10.100711682-007-9002-3
Griffith, H. R., Stewart, C. C., Stoeckel, L. E., Okonkwo, O. C., den Hollander, J. A., Martin, R. C., Belue, K., Copeland,
J. N., Harrell, L. E., Brockington, J. C., Clark, D. G., & Marson, D. C. (2010). Magnetic resonance imaging volume of the
angular gyri predicts financial skill deficits in people with amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society, 58(2), 265–274. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02679.x PMID:20374402
Grisso, T. (1986). Evaluating competencies: Forensic assessments and instruments. Perspectives in law & psychology
(Vol. 7). Plenum Press. doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-5046-8
Grisso, T. (2003). Evaluating competencies: Forensic assessments and instruments. Kluwer.
Gross, A. L., Rebok, G. W., Unverzagt, F. W., Willis, S. L., & Brandt, J. (2011). Cognitive predictors of everyday functioning
in older adults: Results from the ACTIVE Cognitive Intervention Trial. The Journals of Gerontology. Series B,
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66(5), 557–566. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbr033 PMID:21558167
Gualtieri, C. T. (2004). Dementia screening using computerized tests. Journal Of Insurance Medicine-New York Then
Denver, 36, 213–227.
Guarda Nacional Republicana. (2022). Evolução da Operação Censos Sénior. GNR. https://www.gnr.pt/mostrarPdf.
ashx?a=7&i=6628
Guerreiro J., Rodrigues L. & Correia N. (2019). Resource Allocation Model for Sensor Clouds under the Sensing as a
Service Paradigm (pp 1:18). Computers 8 MDPI AG.
Guerreiro, J., Rodrigues, L., & Correia, N. (2020). Allocation of Resources in SAaaS Clouds Managing Thing Mashups
(pp 99:1-1). IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management. IEEE.
Guinard, D., & Trifa, V. (2016). Building the Web of Things. Manning Publications.
Gum, A., King-Kallimanis, B., & Kohn, R. (2009). Prevalence of mood, anxiety, and substanceabuse disorders for older
Americans in the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17(9),
769–781. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ad4f5a PMID:19700949
Gunaratne, R., Pratt, D. N., Banda, J., Fick, D. P., Khan, R. J. K., & Robertson, B. W. (2017). Patient Dissatisfaction Following
Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Systematic Review of the Literature. The Journal of Arthroplasty, 32(12), 3854–3860.
doi:10.1016/j.arth.2017.07.021 PMID:28844632
326
Compilation of References
Güngen, C., Ertan, T., Eker, E., Yaşar, R., & Engin, F. (2002). Reliability and validity of the standardized Mini Mental
State Examination in the diagnosis of mild dementia in Turkish population. Turkish Journal of Psychiatry, 13(4), 273–281.
Guralnick, S., Kemele, K., Stamm, B. H., & Greving, A. M. (2003). Rural geriatrics and gerontology. In B. H. Stamm
(Ed.), Rural behavioral health care: An interdisciplinary guide (pp. 193–202). American Psychological Association.,
doi:10.1037/10489-015
Guralnik, J. M., & Ferrucci, L. (2009). The challenge of understanding the disablement process in older persons: Commentary
responding to Jette AM. Toward a common language of disablement. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A,
Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 64(11), 1169–1176. doi:10.1093/gerona/glp094 PMID:19628636
Hajihashemi, Z., Yefimova, M., & Popescu, M. (2014). Detecting Daily Routines of Older Adults Using Sensor Time
Series Clustering (pp 5912-5915). 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society. IEEE.
Halawi, M. J., Jongbloed, W., Baron, S., Savoy, L., Williams, V. J., & Cote, M. P. (2019). Patient Dissatisfaction After
Primary Total Joint Arthroplasty: The Patient Perspective. The Journal of Arthroplasty, 34(6), 1093–1096. doi:10.1016/j.
arth.2019.01.075 PMID:30799270
Hallford, D. J., & Mellor, D. (2016). Reminiscence and the well-being of elderly women. Journal of Women & Aging,
28(3), 226–234. doi:10.1080/08952841.2015.1094952
Hamilton, D. F., Lane, J. V., Gaston, P., Patton, J. T., Macdonald, D., Simpson, A. H., & Howie, C. R. (2013). What
determines patient satisfaction with surgery? A prospective cohort study of 4709 patients following total joint replacement.
BMJ Open, 3(4), e002525. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002525 PMID:23575998
Han, E.-J., Lee, J., Cho, E., & Kim, H. (2021). Socioeconomic costs of dementia based on utilization of health care and
long-term-care services: A retrospective cohort study. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 18(2), 376.
Hannesdóttir, K., & Snaedal, J. (2002). A study of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog)
in an Icelandic elderly population. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 56(3), 201–206.
Hardy, S. E., Perera, S., Roumani, Y. F., Chandler, J. M., & Studenski, S. A. (2007). Improvement in usual gait speed
predicts better survival in older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 55(11), 1727–1734. doi:10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2007.01413.x PMID:17916121
Harry, A., & Crowe, S. F. (2014). Is the Boston Naming Test still fit for purpose? The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 28(3),
486–504.
Harvey, P. D. (2005). Schizophrenia in late life. Aging effects on symptoms and course of illness. American Psychological
Association., doi:10.1037/10873-000
Haryeni, & Yendra, N. (2019). Impact of Service Quality Dimensions on Patient Satisfaction and Repurchase Intentions
in the Public Health Industry. 97(Piceeba), 456–465. doi:10.2991/piceeba-19.2019.52
Hawker, G. A., Mian, S., Kendzerska, T., & French, M. (2011). Measures of adult pain: Visual Analog Scale for Pain
(VAS Pain), Numeric Rating Scale for Pain (NRS Pain), McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ), Short-Form McGill Pain
Questionnaire (SF-MPQ), Chronic Pain Grade Scale (CPGS), Short Form-36 Bodily Pain Scale (SF-36 BPS), and Measure
of Intermittent and Constant Osteoarthritis Pain (ICOAP). Arthritis Care and Research, 63(S11, Suppl 11), S240–S252.
doi:10.1002/acr.20543 PMID:22588748
327
Compilation of References
Hawkins, K. A., & Bender, S. (2002). Norms and the relationship of Boston Naming Test performance to vocabulary
and education: A review. Aphasiology, 16(12), 1143–1153.
Haynes, R. B., Ackloo, E., Sahota, N., McDonald, H. P., & Yao, X. (2008). Interventions for enhancing medication
adherence. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (2). doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000011.pub3 PMID:18425859
Health Navigator. (2022). Preventing falls. Health Navigator. https://www.healthnavigator.org.nz/health-a-z/f/falls-andfalls-
prevention/
Health Quality & Safety Commission New Zealand. (2020). Reducing harm from falls: Recommended evidence-based
resources 2020. Health Quality & Safety Commission. https://www.hqsc.govt.nz/assets/Our-work/System-safety/Reducing-
harm/Falls/Publications-resources/Reducing_harm_from_falls_recommended_evidence-based_resources_2020.pdf
Health Service Executive. (2008). Strategy to Prevent Falls and Fractures in Ireland’s Ageing Population. Health Service
Executive. https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/olderpeople/strategy-to-prevent-falls-and-fractures-in-irelandsageing-
population.html
Heathcote, D., & Bolton, G. (1995). Drama for Learning. Heinemann.
Hebben, N., & Milberg, W. (2009). Essentials of neuropsychological assessment. John Wiley & Sons.
Heck, L., & Gillespie, G. L. (2013). Interprofessional program to provide emergency sheltering to abused elders. Advanced
Emergency Nursing Journal, 35(2), 170–181. doi:10.1097/TME.0b013e31828ecc06 PMID:23636048
Heiestad, H., Gjestvang, C., & Haakstad, L. A. (2020). Investigating self-perceived health and quality of life: A longitudinal
prospective study among beginner recreational exercisers in a fitness club setting. BMJ Open, 10(6), e036250.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-036250 PMID:32513890
Heijink, A., Gomoll, A. H., Madry, H., Drobnič, M., Filardo, G., Espregueira-Mendes, J., & Van Dijk, C. N. (2012).
Biomechanical considerations in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis of the knee. Knee surgery, sports traumatology,
arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 20(3), 423–435. doi:10.1007/s00167-011-1818-0
Heilbronner, R. L. (2004). A status report on the practice of forensic neuropsychology. The Clinical Neuropsychologist,
18(2), 312–326. doi:10.1080/13854040490501574 PMID:15587677
Heilbrun, K., Marczyk, G. R., DeMatteo, D., Zillmer, E. A., Harris, J., & Jennings, T. (2003). Principles of forensic mental
health assessment: Implications for neuropsychological assessment in forensic contexts. Assessment, 10(4), 329–343.
doi:10.1177/1073191103258591 PMID:14682479
Heiney, S. P., Donevant, S. B., Arp Adams, S., Parker, P. D., Chen, H., & Levkoff, S. (2020). A Smartphone App for
Self-Management of Heart Failure in Older African Americans: Feasibility and Usability Study. JMIR Aging, 3(1),
e17142. doi:10.2196/17142 PMID:32242822
Heng, H., Kiegaldie, D., Shaw, L., Jazayeri, D., Hill, A.M. & Morris, M.E. (2022a). Implementing Patient Falls Education
in Hospitals: A Mixed-Methods Trial. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 10(7):1298. doi:. doi:10.3390/healthcare10071298
Heng, H., Kiegaldie, D., Slade, S.C., Jazayeri, D., Shaw, L., Knight, M., et al. (2022b). Healthcare professional perspectives
on barriers and enablers to falls prevention education: A qualitative study. PLoS One, 17(4), e0266797. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0266797
Heng, H., Jazayeri, D., Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., Hill, A.-M., & Morris, M. E. (2020). Hospital falls prevention with
patient education: A scoping review. BMC Geriatrics, 20(1), 140. doi:10.118612877-020-01515-w
328
Compilation of References
Henriques, M. A., Costa, M. A., & Cabrita, J. (2012). Adherence and medication management by the elderly. Journal
of Clinical Nursing, 21(21–22), 3096–3105. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2702.2012.04144.x
Herranz, N., & Gil, J. (2018). Mechanisms and functions of cellular senescence. The Journal of Clinical Investigation,
128(4), 1238–1246. doi:10.1172/JCI95148 PMID:29608137
Hettinga, M., De Boer, J., Goldberg, E., & Moelaert, F. (2009). Navigation for people with mild dementia. MIE, 428–432.
Hill, R. (2005). Positive aging: A guide for mental health professionals and consumers. W. W. Norton.
Hitt, K., Shurman, J. R. II, Greene, K., McCarthy, J., Moskal, J., Hoeman, T., & Mont, M. A. (2003). Anthropometric
measurements of the human knee: Correlation to the sizing of current knee arthroplasty systems. The Journal of Bone and
Joint Surgery. American Volume, 85-A(Suppl 4), 115–122. doi:10.2106/00004623-200300004-00015 PMID:14652402
Hjaltadóttir, I., Hallberg, I. R., Ekwall, A. K., & Nyberg, P. (2011). Predicting mortality of residents at admission to
nursing home: A longitudinal cohort study. BMC Health Services Research, 11(1), 86. doi:10.1186/1472-6963-11-86
PMID:21507213
Hodgson, S., Watts, I., Fraser, S., Roderick, P., & Dambha-Miller, H. (2020). Loneliness, social isolation, cardiovascular
disease and mortality: A synthesis of the literature and conceptual framework. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine,
113(5), 185–192. doi:10.1177/0141076820918236
Hoffman, G. J., Malani, P. N., Solway, E., Kirch, M., Singer, D. C., & Kullgren, J. T. (2022). Changes in activity levels,
physical functioning, and fall risk during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 70(1),
49–59. doi:10.1111/jgs.17477
Hong, Y.-J., Kim, I.-J., Ahn, S. C., & Kim, H.-G. (2008). Activity Recognition using Wearable Sensors for Elder Care
(pp 302-305). 2008 Second International Conference on Future Generation Communication and Networking. IEEE.
10.1109/FGCN.2008.165
Howell, T., Gummadi, S., Bui, C., Santhakumar, J., Knight, K., Roberson, E. D., Marson, D., Chambless, C., Gersteneker,
A., Martin, R., Kennedy, R., Zhang, Y., Morris, J. C., Moulder, K. L., Mayo, C., Carroll, M., Li, Y., Petersen, R. C.,
Stricker, N. H., & Weiner, M. W. (2022). Development and implementation of an electronic Clinical Dementia Rating
and Financial Capacity Instrument-Short Form. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring,
14(1), e12331. doi:10.1002/dad2.12331 PMID:35898521
Howieson, D. (2019). Current limitations of neuropsychological tests and assessment procedures. The Clinical Neuropsychologist,
33(2), 200–208.
Hsieh, C., Shi, W., Huang, H., Liu, K., Hsu, S. J., & Chan, C. (2018). Machine Learning-based Fall Characteristics
Monitoring System for Strategic Plan of Falls Prevention (pp 818-821). 2018 IEEE International Conference on Applied
System Innovation 2018. IEEE.
Hsieh, S., McGrory, S., Leslie, F., Dawson, K., Ahmed, S., Butler, C. R., Rowe, J. B., Mioshi, E., & Hodges, J. R. (2015).
The Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination: A new assessment tool for dementia. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 39(1–2), 1–11.
Hsu, Y. C., Lin, C. H., & Chen, W. T. (2014). Design of a Sensing Service Architecture for Internet of Things with Semantic
Sensor Selection. In International Conference UTC-ATC-ScalCom, Bali, Indonesia. 10.1109/UIC-ATC-ScalCom.2014.85
Huang, C., Weng, S., & Lee, S. (2019). The effectiveness of a resilience-based intervention on psychological wellbeing
and stress in older adults with chronic illness. The Journal of Nursing Research, 27(5), e43. doi:10.1097/
JNR.0000000000000315 PMID:31524854
329
Compilation of References
Huh, J. T., Weaver, C. M., Martin, J. L., Caskey, N. H., O’Riley, A., & Kramer, B. J. (2012). Effects of a late-life suicide
risk-assessment training on multidisciplinary healthcare providers. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 60(4),
775–780. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03843.x PMID:22288717
Hung, W. W., Ross, J. S., Boockvar, K. S., & Siu, A. L. (2011). Recent trends in chronic disease, impairment and disability
among older adults in the United States. BMC Geriatrics, 11(1), 47. doi:10.1186/1471-2318-11-47 PMID:21851629
Husain, A., & Lee, G. C. (2015). Establishing Realistic Patient Expectations Following Total Knee Arthroplasty. The Journal
of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 23(12), 707–713. doi:10.5435/JAAOS-D-14-00049 PMID:26493969
Hussain, A., Sial, M. S., Usman, S. M., Hwang, J., Jiang, Y., & Shafiq, A. (2019). What Factors Affect Patient Satisfaction
in Public Sector Hospitals: Evidence from an Emerging Economy. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health, 16(6), 994. doi:10.3390/ijerph16060994
Huta, V., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). Pursuing pleasure or virtue: The differential and overlapping well-being benefits of
hedonic and eudaimonic motives. Journal of Happiness Studies, 11(6), 735–762. doi:10.100710902-009-9171-4
Hu, W., Li, T., Cao, S., Gu, Y., & Chen, L. (2022). Influence of Nurse-Led Health Education on Self-Management Ability,
Satisfaction, and Compliance of Elderly Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Based on Knowledge, Belief,
and Practice Model. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 1782955, 1–9. doi:10.1155/2022/1782955
PMID:35979056
ICF. (2001). International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). WHO. https://www.who.int/
classifications/icf/en/
Iizuka, T., Iizuka, R., & Kameyama, M. (2017). Cingulate island sign temporally changes in dementia with Lewy bodies.
Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1–9.
Impellizzeri, F. M., Mannion, A. F., Leunig, M., Bizzini, M., & Naal, F. D. (2011). Comparison of the reliability, responsiveness,
and construct validity of 4 different questionnaires for evaluating outcomes after total knee arthroplasty.
The Journal of Arthroplasty, 26(6), 861–869. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2010.07.027 PMID:21074964
InCARE. (2022). Attitudes, experiences and expectations on long-term care in North Macedonia. InCARE. https://
incare.euro.centre.org/
Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE). (2021b). Taxa de mortalidade (30 a 70 anos) atribuída a doenças do aparelho
circulatório, tumores malignos, diabetes mellitus e doenças crónicas respiratórias por 100000 habitantes. INE. https://
www.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_indicadores&contecto=pi&indOcorrCod=0009100&selTab=tab0
Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE). (2022) Statistics Portugal. INE. https://www.ine.pt/xportal/
xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_main
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2019). Redução da população residente em 2018 menor que a de 2017, Destaque INE.
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. https://www.om.acm.gov.pt/-/destaque-estatistico-ine-reducao-da-populacao-residenteem-
2018-menor-que-a-de-2017-
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2020). Inquérito à Fecundidade. Instituto Nacional de Estatística. https://www.ine.
pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_destaques&DESTAQUESdest_boui=415655178&DESTAQUESmodo=2&
xlang=pt
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2020). Projeções de população Residente 2018-2080. INE. https://www.ine.pt/xportal/
xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_destaques&DESTAQUESdest_boui=406534255&DESTAQUESmodo=2&xlang=pt
330
Compilation of References
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2021a). Estatísticas Demográficas 2020. Instituto Nacional de Estatística. https://
www.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpid=INE&xpgid=ine_publicacoes&PUBLICACOESpub_boui=442993507&PUBLICA
COESmodo=2
Instituto Nacional de Estatística. (2022). Censos 2021 Resultados Definitivos – Portugal. INE. https://censos.ine.pt/
xportal/xmain?xpgid=censos21_main&xpid=CENSOS21&xlang=pt
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge. (2014). Envelhecimento e Violência (2011-2014). INE. http://repositorio.
insa.pt/bitstream/10400.18/1955/3/Envelhecimento%20e%20Viol%C3%AAncia%202011-2014%20.pdf
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). (n.d.). International Classification of Functioning,
Disability and Health (ICF). WHO. https://www.who.int/classifications/icf/en/
Jacobs, H. I. L., Van Boxtel, M. P. J., Jolles, J., Verhey, F. R. J., & Uylings, H. B. M. (2012). Parietal cortex matters in
Alzheimer’s disease: An overview of structural, functional and metabolic findings. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 36(1), 297–309.
Jacova, C., Kertesz, A., Blair, M., Fisk, J. D., & Feldman, H. H. (2007). Neuropsychological testing and assessment for
dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 3(4), 299–317.
Jafari, Z., Moritz, P. S., Zandi, T., Kamrani, A. A. A., & Malayeri, S. (2010). Iranian version of the Rey Auditory Verbal
Learning Test: A validation study. [Health Monitor]. Payesh, 9(3), 307–316.
Jagger, C., Arthur, A. J., Spiers, N. A., & Clarke, M. (2001). Patterns of onset of disability in activities of daily living with
age. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 49(4), 404–409. doi:10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49083.x PMID:11347783
Jakobsen, T. L., Christensen, M., Christensen, S. S., Olsen, M., & Bandholm, T. (2010). Reliability of knee joint range
of motion and circumference measurements after total knee arthroplasty: does tester experience matter? Physiotherapy
research international: the journal for researchers and clinicians in physical therapy, 15(3), 126–134. doi:10.1002/pri.450
James, S. L., Lucchesi, L. R., Bisignano, C., Castle, C. D., Dingels, Z. V., & Fox, J. T. (2020). The global burden of
falls: Global, regional, and national estimates of morbidity and mortality from the global burden of disease study 2017.
Injury Prevention, 26, i3–i11.
Janura, M., Peham, C., Dvorakova, T., & Elfmark, M. (2009). An assessment of the pressure distribution exerted by a rider
on the back of a horse during hippotherapy. Human Movement Science, 28(3), 387–393. doi:10.1016/j.humov.2009.04.001
PMID:19406498
Jefferson, A. L., Paul, R. H., Ozonoff, A., & Cohen, R. A. (2006). Evaluating elements of executive functioning as
predictors of instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs). Archives of clinical neuropsychology: the official journal
of the National Academy of Neuropsychologists, 21(4), 311–320. doi:10.1016/j.acn.2006.03.007
Jefferson, A. L., Barakat, L. P., Giovannetti, T., Paul, R. H., & Glosser, G. (2006). Object perception impairments predict
instrumental activities of daily living dependence in Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 28(6), 884–897. doi:10.1080/13803390591001034 PMID:16822730
Jefferson, A. L., Cahn-Weiner, D. A., Boyle, P. A., Paul, R. H., Moser, D. J., & Gordon, N. (2006). Longitudinal changes
in activities of daily living (ADLs) among patients with vascular dementia (VaD). International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 21(8), 752–754. doi:10.1002/gps.1556 PMID:16906630
Jette, A. M., Haley, S. M., & Kooyoomjian, J. T. (2003). Are the ICF Activity and Participation dimensions distinct?
Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, 35(3), 145–149. doi:10.1080/16501970310010501 PMID:12809198
331
Compilation of References
Jette, D. U., Hunter, S. J., Burkett, L., Langham, B., Logerstedt, D. S., Piuzzi, N. S., Poirier, N. M., Radach, L. J. L.,
Ritter, J. E., Scalzitti, D. A., Stevens-Lapsley, J. E., Tompkins, J., & Zeni, J. Jr. (2020). Physical Therapist Management
of Total Knee Arthroplasty. Physical Therapy, 100(9), 1603–1631. doi:10.1093/ptj/pzaa099 PMID:32542403
Jiang, J., Rickson, D., Feng, Y., & Shi, Y. (2018). Mindfulness-based stress reduction and group reminiscence therapy
for older adults with depression: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 37(8), 935–954.
doi:10.1177/0733464816659539
Jiang, Y. (2022). Construction of an Intelligent System for Elderly’s Health and Elderly Care from the Perspective of the
Integration of Smart Sensors and Physical Medicine (pp 541-544). Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
on Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT-2022), IEEE. 10.1109/ICSSIT53264.2022.9716434
Johnson, J. K., Lui, L. Y., & Yaffe, K. (2007). Executive function, more than global cognition, predicts functional decline
and mortality in elderly women. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences,
62(10), 1134–1141. doi:10.1093/gerona/62.10.1134 PMID:17921427
Johnson, R., Shaw, J., Berding, J., Gather, M., & Rebstock, M. (2017). European national government approaches to
older people’s transport system needs. Transport Policy, 59, 17–27. doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2017.06.005
Jönsson, L., & Wimo, A. (2009). The cost of dementia in Europe. PharmacoEconomics, 27(5), 391–403.
Jorm, A. F. (1996). Assessment of cognitive impairment and dementia using informant reports. Clinical Psychology
Review, 16(1), 51–73. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0272-7358(95)00056-9
Kalaja, R., Myshketa, R., & Scalera, F. (2016). Service Quality Assessment in Health Care Sector: The Case of Durres
Public Hospital. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 235, 557–565. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2016.11.082
Kalaw, E., Peck, K., Tan, L., & Liu, S. (2020). PERMA and meaningful life models: Positive psychology constructs in
reminiscence and well-being. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 63(8), 764–776. doi:10.1080/01634372.2020.1742613
Kamra, V., Singh, H., & Kumar De, K. (2015). Factors affecting patient satisfaction: an exploratory study for quality
management in the health-care sector. Taylor and Francis. Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1080/14783363.2015.1057488, doi:1
0.1080/14783363.2015.1057488
Kappelhof, R. (2021). EIP on AHA achievements: Action group A2 - Falls prevention. EC. https://futurium.ec.europa.
eu/en/active-and-healthy-living-digital-world/library/eip-aha-achievements-action-group-a2-falls-prevention
Katsuumi, G., Shimizu, I., Yoshida, Y., & Minamino, T. (2018). Vascular senescence in cardiovascular and metabolic
diseases. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 5, 18. doi:10.3389/fcvm.2018.00018 PMID:29556500
Katuti, C. S. (2018). Patient Level of Satisfaction with Perceived Health Service Quality in Nyandarua County Referral
Hospital. Kenyatta University.
Keeler, E., Guralnik, J. M., Tian, H., Wallace, R. B., & Reuben, D. B. (2010). The impact of functional status on life
expectancy in older persons. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 65(7),
727–733. doi:10.1093/gerona/glq029 PMID:20363833
Kempen, G. I., Myers, A. M., & Powell, L. E. (1995). Hierarchical structure in ADL and IADL: Analytical assumptions
and applications for clinicians and researchers. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 48(11), 1299–1305. doi:10.1016/0895-
4356(95)00043-7 PMID:7490592
Kennedy, D. M., Stratford, P. W., Hanna, S. E., Wessel, J., & Gollish, J. D. (2006). Modeling early recovery of physical
function following hip and knee arthroplasty. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 7(1), 100. doi:10.1186/1471-2474-7-100
PMID:17156487
332
Compilation of References
Kenny, R. A., Romero-Ortuno, R., & Kumar, P. (2017). Falls in older adults. Medicine, 45(1), 28–33. doi:10.1016/j.
mpmed.2016.10.007 PMID:28298236
Kerwin, D., Abdelnour, C., Caramelli, P., Ogunniyi, A., Shi, J., Zetterberg, H., & Traber, M. (2022). Alzheimer’s disease
diagnosis and management: Perspectives from around the world. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &
Disease Monitoring, 14(1), e12334.
Khan, T. K. (2016). Clinical Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease. In T. K. Khan (Ed.), Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s Disease
(pp. 27–48). Academic Press. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804832-0.00002-X.
Khatib, Y., Badge, H., Xuan, W., Naylor, J. M., & Harris, I. A. (2020). Patient satisfaction and perception of success after
total knee arthroplasty are more strongly associated with patient factors and complications than surgical or anaesthetic
factors. Knee surgery, sports traumatology, arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 28(10), 3156–3163. doi:10.1007/
s00167-019-05804-9
Kim M., Asthana M., Bhargava, S., Iyyer K. K., Tangadpalliwar R. & Gao, J. (2016). Developing an On-Demand Cloud-
Based Sensing-as-a-Service System for Internet of Things. Journal of Computer Networks and Communications.
Kim, J., & Parish, A. L. (2017). Polypharmacy and medication management in older adults. Nursing Clinics, 52(3),
457–468. doi:10.1016/j.cnur.2017.04.007 PMID:28779826
Kim, M. J., Kim, T., Oh, S., & Yoon, B. (2018). Equine Exercise in Younger and Older Adults: Simulated Versus Real
Horseback Riding. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 125(1), 93–108. doi:10.1177/0031512517736463 PMID:29073822
Kim, S.-R., Cho, S.-H., Kim, J.-W., Lee, H.-C., Brienen, M., & Cho, B.-J. (2015). Effects of horseback riding exercise
therapy on background electroencephalograms of elderly people. Journal of Physical Therapy Science, 27(7), 2373–2376.
doi:10.1589/jpts.27.2373 PMID:26311985
Kingston, A., Collerton, J., Davies, K., Bond, J., Robinson, L., & Jagger, C. (2012). Losing the ability in activities of
daily living in the oldest old: A hierarchic disability scale from the Newcastle 85+ study. PLoS One, 7(2), e31665.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031665 PMID:22355385
Kingston, A., Robinson, L., Booth, H., Knapp, M., & Jagger, C. (2018). Projections of multi-morbidity in the older
population in England to 2035: Estimates from the Population Ageing and Care Simulation (PACSim) model. Age and
Ageing, 47(3), 374–380. doi:10.1093/ageing/afx201 PMID:29370339
Kitapci, O., Akdogan, C., & Dortyol, İ. T. (2014). The Impact of Service Quality Dimensions on Patient Satisfaction,
Repurchase Intentions and Word-of-Mouth Communication in the Public Healthcare Industry. Procedia: Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 148, 161–169. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.030
Kivipelto, M., Mangialasche, F., & Ngandu, T. (2018). Lifestyle interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, dementia
and Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews. Neurology, 14(11), 653–666.
Kivipelto, M., Mangialasche, F., Snyder, H. M., Allegri, R., Andrieu, S., Arai, H., Baker, L., Belleville, S., Brodaty,
H., & Brucki, S. M. (2020). World‐Wide FINGERS Network: A global approach to risk reduction and prevention of
dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 16(7), 1078–1094.
Koçak, S., Artug, T., & Tulum, G. (2018). A Preliminar Study for Remote Healthcare System: Activity Classification for
Elder People with on Body Sensors. 2018 6th International Conference on Control Engineering & Information Technology
(CEIT), Istanbul, Turkey.
Kochanek, K. D., Xu, J., Murphy, S. L., Miniño, A. M., & Kung, H. (2012). Deaths: Final data for 2009. National Vital
Statistics Reports, 60(3), 1–116. PMID:24974587
333
Compilation of References
Kokou, P., van Tonder, E., & Roberts-Lombard, M. (2015). Patient Satisfaction Measurement For In-Hospital Services
Delivered By Nurses: Guidelines For Improving Practice In Africa. American Journal of Health Sciences, 6(1), 23–36.
doi:10.19030/ajhs.v6i1.9267
Konstam, V., & Lehmann, I. (2011). Chapter 60 - Cognitive Impairment in Heart Failure. In D. L. Mann (Ed.), Heart
Failure: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease (Second Edition) (Second Edi, pp. 867–875). W.B. Saunders.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4160-5895-3.10060-9
Kopp, B., Lange, F., & Steinke, A. (2021). The reliability of the Wisconsin card sorting test in clinical practice. Assessment,
28(1), 248–263.
Kounti, F., Tsolaki, M., & Kiosseoglou, G. (2006). Functional cognitive assessment scale (FUCAS): A new scale to assess
executive cognitive function in daily life activities in patients with dementia and mild cognitive impairment. Human
Psychopharmacology, 21(5), 305–311. doi:10.1002/hup.772 PMID:16856217
Kourtesis, P., Margioti, E., Demenega, C., Christidi, F., & Abrahams, S. (2020). Addenbrooke Cognitive Examination-
III and detection of Alzheimer’s disease: A comparison of ACE-III, M-ACE and ECAS in a Greek Alzheimer’s disease
population. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 26(8), 825–834.
Kozlova, I., Booth, T., Parra Rodriguez, M., & Della Sala, S. (2019) The Acreemagnosia Measurement: Psychometric
evaluation of a new assessment of the loss of financial knowledge. Working Paper, PsyArXiv, Ithaca, N.Y.
Kubota, M., Nagasaki, M., Tokudome, M., Shinomiya, Y., Ozawa, T., & Sato, Y. (2006). Mechanical horseback riding
improves insulin sensitivity in elder diabetic patients. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 71(2), 124–130.
doi:10.1016/j.diabres.2005.06.012 PMID:16105705
Kueper, J. K., Speechley, M., & Montero-Odasso, M. (2018). The Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale–cognitive
subscale (ADAS-Cog): Modifications and responsiveness in pre-dementia populations. a narrative review. Journal of
Alzheimer’s Disease, 63(2), 423–444.
Kühner, C., Bürger, C., Keller, F., Hautzinger, M., & Bradlowski, M. (2019). A comparative study of two positive psychology
interventions for depressed patients. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 75(9), 1582–1600. doi:10.1002/jclp.22779
Kumazawa, Y., Matsuda, O., & Sakuraba, Y. (2004). Relationship between financial competency and cognitive function
inpatients with Alzheimer’s disease: Examination by using Financial Competency Assessment Tool (FCAT). Japanese
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15, 1177–1185.
Kurlowicz, L., & Wallace, M. (1999). The mini-mental state examination (MMSE). Journal of Gerontological Nursing,
25(5), 8–9.
Lages, I. (2012/2013). A enfermagem e o cuidado cultural. FORUM, 47-48, 187–189.
Lai, C. F., Chao, H. C., Lai, Y. X., & Wan, J. (2013). Cloud-Assisted Real-time Transrating for HTTP Live Streaming
(pp 61-70). IEEE Wireless Communications, 20.
Lai, C. F., Wang, H. C., Chao, H. C., & Han, G. (2013). A Network and Device Aware QoS Approach for Cloud-Based
Mobile Streaming. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia. doi:10.1109/TMM.2013.2240270
Lai, J. M., Gill, T. M., Cooney, L. M., Bradley, E. H., Hawkins, K. A., & Karlawish, J. H. (2008). Everyday decisionmaking
ability in older persons with cognitive impairment. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(8), 693–696.
doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e31816c7b54 PMID:18669948
334
Compilation of References
Lai, J. M., & Karlawish, J. (2007). Assessing the capacity to make everyday decisions: A guide for clinicians and
an agenda for future research. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(2), 101–111. doi:10.1097/01.
JGP.0000239246.10056.2e PMID:17272730
Lam, C. S., Wong, J. W., & Law, L. S. (2015). A life review intervention using guided autobiography for communitydwelling
elderly adults: A pilot study. The Gerontologist, 55(6), 1030–1037. doi:10.1093/geront/gnv006
Langford, C. P. H., Bowsher, J., Maloney, J. P., & Lillis, P. P. (1997). Social support: A conceptual analysis. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 25(1), 95–100. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.1997025095.x PMID:9004016
Larner, A. J. (2020). Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (MACE): A useful cognitive screening instrument in
older people? Canadian Geriatrics Journal, 23(2), 199–204.
Lau, R. L., Gandhi, R., Mahomed, S., & Mahomed, N. (2012). Patient satisfaction after total knee and hip arthroplasty.
Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 28(3), 349–365. doi:10.1016/j.cger.2012.05.001 PMID:22840303
Law n.º 100/2019, de 6 de setembro. Estatuto do Cuidador Informal. Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 171.
Law n.º 130/2015, de 04 de setembro. Estatuto da Vítima. Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 173.
Law n.º 147/99, de 1 de setembro. Lei de proteção de crianças e jovens em perigo. Diário da República, 1.ª Série, n.º 204.
Law n.º 49/2018, de 14 de agosto. Regime Jurídico do Maior Acompanhado. Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 156.
Law Nr 100/2019, 06/09. Estatuto do Cuidador Informal. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 171, p. 3 – 16.
Law Nr 49/2018, 14/08. Regime Jurídico do Maior Acompanhado. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 156, p. 4072 – 4086.
Lawrence, R. C., Felson, D. T., Helmick, C. G., Arnold, L. M., Choi, H., Deyo, R. A., Gabriel, S., Hirsch, R., Hochberg,
M. C., Hunder, G. G., Jordan, J. M., Katz, J. N., Kremers, H. M., & Wolfe, F.National Arthritis Data Workgroup.
(2008). Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic conditions in the United States. Part II. Arthritis and
Rheumatism, 58(1), 26–35. doi:10.1002/art.23176 PMID:18163497
Lawton, M. P., & Brody, E. M. (1969). Assessment of older people: Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily
living. The Gerontologist, 9(3 Part 1), 179–186. doi:10.1093/geront/9.3_Part_1.179 PMID:5349366
Lazar, C. M., Black, A. C., McMahon, T. J., Rosenheck, R. A., Ries, R., Ames, D., & Rosen, M. I. (2016). All-data approach
to assessing financial capability in people with psychiatric disabilities. Psychological Assessment, 28(4), 362–371.
doi:10.1037/pas0000179 PMID:26146947
Lee, D.-C. A., Pritchard, E., McDermott, F., & Haines, T. P. (2014). Falls prevention education for older adults during
and after hospitalization: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Education Journal, 73(5), 530–544.
doi:10.1177/0017896913499266
Lee, H., & Ailshire, J. (2020). Neighborhood and Housing Conditions and Risk of Falls. Innovation in Aging, 4(Suppl
1), 651–652. doi:10.1093/geroni/igaa057.2245
Lee, J., Lau, S., Meijer, E., & Hu, P. (2020). Living Longer, With or Without Disability? A Global and Longitudinal Perspective.
The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 75(1), 162–167. doi:10.1093/
gerona/glz007 PMID:30629214
Lee, K., Dabelko-Schoeny, H., Jedlicka, H., & Burns, T. (2020). Older Adults’ Perceived Benefits of Equine-Assisted Psychotherapy:
Implications for Social Work. Research on Social Work Practice, 30(4), 399–407. doi:10.1177/1049731519890399
335
Compilation of References
Lefler, L. L., Rhoads, S. J., Harris, M., Funderburg, A. E., Lubin, S. A., Martel, I. D., Faulkner, J. L., Rooker, J. L., Bell,
D. K., Marshall, H., & Beverly, C. J. (2018). Evaluating the Use of Mobile Health Technology in Older Adults With
Heart Failure: Mixed-Methods Study. JMIR Aging, 1(2), e12178. doi:10.2196/12178 PMID:31518257
Lekeu, F., Magis, D., Marique, P., Delbeuck, X., Bechet, S., Guillaume, B., Adam, S., Petermans, J., Moonen, G., &
Salmon, E. (2010). The California Verbal Learning Test and other standard clinical neuropsychological tests to predict
conversion from mild memory impairment to dementia. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 32(2),
164–173.
Lenssen, T. A., van Steyn, M. J., Crijns, Y. H., Waltjé, E. M., Roox, G. M., Geesink, R. J., van den Brandt, P. A., & De
Bie, R. A. (2008). Effectiveness of prolonged use of continuous passive motion (CPM), as an adjunct to physiotherapy,
after total knee arthroplasty. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 9(1), 60. doi:10.1186/1471-2474-9-60 PMID:18442423
Leonardi, M. (2010). Measuring health and disability: Supporting policy development. The European MHADIE project.
Disability and Rehabilitation, 32(sup1, Suppl 1), S1–S8. doi:10.3109/09638288.2010.520806 PMID:20874446
Leonardi, M., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Hollenweger, J., Pessina, A., & Bickenbach, J. E. (2012). Multidisciplinary research
and training network on health and disability in Europe: The MURINET project. American Journal of Physical Medicine
& Rehabilitation, 91(13, Suppl 1), S1–S4. doi:10.1097/PHM.0b013e31823d699e PMID:22193330
Leonardi, M., Chatterji, S., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Hollenweger, J., Ustün, B., Kostanjsek, N. F., Newton, A., BjörckÅkesson,
E., Francescutti, C., Alonso, J., Matucci, M., Samoilescu, A., Good, A., Cieza, A., Svestkova, O., Bullinger,
M., Marincek, C., Burger, H., Raggi, A., & Bickenbach, J. E. (2010). Integrating research into policy planning: MHADIE
policy recommendations. Disability and Rehabilitation, 32(sup1, Suppl 1), S139–S147. doi:10.3109/09638288.2010.5
20807 PMID:20874663
Lezak, M. D., Howieson, D. B., Loring, D. W., & Fischer, J. S. (2004). Neuropsychological assessment. Oxford University
Press.
Li H., Shrestha A., Heidari H., Kernec J. & Fioranelli F. (2018). A Multisensory Approach for Remote Health Monitoring
of Older People. IEEE Journal of Electromagnetics, RF, Microwaves in Medicine and Biology, 2(2).
Libon, D. J., Mattson, R. E., Glosser, G., Kaplan, E., Malamut, B. L., Sands, L. P., Swenson, R., & Cloud, B. S. (1996).
A nine—Word dementia version of the California verbal learning test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 10(3), 237–244.
Lichtenberg, P. A. (2015). Financial decision making in the midst of cognitive decline. Presentation to the Committee
to Evaluate the Social Security Administration’s Capability Determination Process for Adult Beneficiaries, Washington
DC, USA.
Lichtenberg, P. A., Qualls, S. H., & Smyer, M. A. (2015). Competency and decision-making capacity: Negotiating health
and financial decision making. In P. A. Lichtenberg, B. T. Mast, B. D. Carpenter, & J. Wetherell (Eds.), APA handbook
of clinical geropsychology, Vol. 2: Assessment, treatment, and issues of later life. (pp. 553–578). Washington: American
Psychological Association.
Lichtenberg, P.A., Teresi, J.A., Ocepek-Welikson, K., & Eimicke, J.P. (2017). Reliability and validity of the Lichtenberg
Financial Decision Screening Scale. Innovations in Aging, 1, 1(1), igx003.
Lichtenberg. P.A., Tocco, M., Moray, J., & Hal,l L. (2021). Examining the validity of the Financial Exploitation Vulnerability
Scale. Clinical Gerontologist, 44(5), 585-593.
336
Compilation of References
Lichtenberg, P. A., Ficker, L., Rahman-Filipiak, A., Tatro, R., Farrell, C., Speir, J. J., Mall, S. J., Simasko, P., Collens,
H. H., & Jackman, J. D. (2016). The Lichtenberg Financial Decision Screening Scale (LFDSS): A new tool for assessing
financial decision making and preventing financial exploitation. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 28(3), 134–151. do
i:10.1080/08946566.2016.1168333 PMID:27010780
Lichtenberg, P. A., Gross, E., & Campbell, R. (2020). A short form of the Lichtenberg Financial Decision Rating Scale.
Clinical Gerontologist, 43(3), 256–265. doi:10.1080/07317115.2018.1527424 PMID:30321125
Lichtenberg, P. A., Stoltman, J., Ficker, L. J., Iris, M., & Mast, B. (2015). A person-centered approach to financial capacity
assessment: Preliminary development of a new rating scale. Clinical Gerontologist, 38(1), 49–67. doi:10.1080/0
7317115.2014.970318 PMID:25866438
Linari, I., Juantorena, G. E., Ibáñez, A., Petroni, A., & Kamienkowski, J. E. (2022). Unveiling Trail Making Test: Visual
and manual trajectories indexing multiple executive processes. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 14265.
Lin, N., & Ensel, W. M. (1989). Life stress and health: Stressors and resources. American Sociological Review, 54(3),
382–399. doi:10.2307/2095612
Liu, H., Yang, Y., Xia, Y., Zhu, W., Leak, R. K., Wei, Z., Wang, J., & Hu, X. (2017). Aging of cerebral white matter.
Ageing Research Reviews, 34, 64–76. doi:10.1016/j.arr.2016.11.006 PMID:27865980
Liu, J., Yang, Y., Wan, S., Yao, Z., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Shi, P., & Zhang, C. (2021). A new prediction model for patient
satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty and the roles of different scoring systems: A retrospective cohort study. Journal
of Orthopaedic Surgery and Research, 16(1), 329. doi:10.118613018-021-02469-4 PMID:34016153
Locher, J. L., Ritchie, C. S., Roth, D. L., Sen, B., Vickers, K. S., & Vailas, L. I. (2009). Food choice among homebound
older adults: Motivations and perceived barriers. JNHA-The Journal of Nutrition. Health and Aging, 13(8), 659–664.
PMID:19657547
Loeb, P. A. (1996). Independent Living Scales: Additional record forms. Psychological Corp.
Loenneker, H. D., Becker, S., Nussbaum, S., Nuerk, H.-C., & Liepelt-Scarfone, I. (2021). Arithmetic errors in financial
contexts in Parkinson’s Disease. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 629984. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.629984 PMID:33935881
Lollar, D. J., & Crews, J. E. (2003). Redefining the role of public health in disability. Annual Review of Public Health,
24(1), 195–208. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.24.100901.140844 PMID:12668756
López, I. V. (2006). El apoyo social de familias en situación de riesgo. (Documento nº 04/06). Espanha: Fundación
Acción Familiar.
López, A. B., & Sánchez, E. M. (2001). Estructura social, apoyo social y salud mental. Psicothema, 13(1), 17–23.
López, I., Menéndez, S., Lorence, B., Jiménez, L., Hidalgo, V., & Sánchez, J. (2007). Evaluación del apoyo social mediante
la escala ASSIS: Descripción y resultados en una muestra de madres en situación de riesgo psicosocial. Intervención
Psicosocial, 16(3), 323–337.
López-Romero, L. A., Romero-Guevara, S. L., Parra, D. I., & Rojas-Sánchez, L. Z. (2016). Adherencia al tratamiento:
Concepto y medición. Hacia la Promoción de la Salud, 21(1), 117–137. doi:10.17151/hpsal.2016.21.1.10
Lorence, B. (2008). Procesos de socialización parental con adolescentes de familias en situación de riesgo psicosocial.
V Premio Joven de Investigación de Familia (Documento nº 04/08), Madrid, Espanha: Fundación Acción Familiar.
Luthar, S. S. (2006). Resilience in development: A synthesis of research across five decades. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen
(Eds.). Vol. 3: Development Psychopathology: Risk, disorder, and adaptation (2ªed, pp. 739-795). New York, NY: Wiley.
337
Compilation of References
Macedonian Anti-Poverty Platform. (2011). Report on Poverty and Social Exclusion in the Republic of Macedonia 2010.
EAPN. https://www.eapn.eu/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/2011-eapn-fyrom-poverty-and-social-exclusion-in-rep-ofmacedonia.
pdf
Mackin, R. S., & Areán, P. A. (2009). Impaired financial capacity in late life depression is associated with cognitive
performance on measures of executive functioning and attention. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society,
15(5), 793–798. doi:10.1017/S1355617709990300 PMID:19635176
Madry, H., Luyten, F. P., & Facchini, A. (2012). Biological aspects of early osteoarthritis. Knee surgery, sports traumatology,
arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 20(3), 407–422. doi:10.1007/s00167-011-1705-8
Mahbub, M. H., Hase, R., Yamaguchi, N., Hiroshige, K., Harada, N., Bhuiyan, A. N. M., & Tanabe, T. (2020). Acute
Effects of Whole-Body Vibration on Peripheral Blood Flow, Vibrotactile Perception and Balance in Older Adults. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(3), 1069. doi:10.3390/ijerph17031069 PMID:32046205
Maitre, J., Jully, J. L., Gasnier, Y., & Paillard, T. (2013). Chronic physical activity preserves efficiency of proprioception
in postural control in older women. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 50(6).
Manita, C., Ribeiro, C., & Peixoto, C. (2009). Violência Doméstica: Compreender para Intervir, guia de boas práticas
para profissionais de instituições de apoio a vítimas. Comissão para a Cidadania e Igualdade de Género, Lisboa.
Mankia, K., & Emery, P. (2019). Palindromic rheumatism as part of the rheumatoid arthritis continuum. Nature Reviews.
Rheumatology, 15(11), 687–695. doi:10.103841584-019-0308-5 PMID:31595059
Manzoor, F., Wei, L., Hussain, A., Asif, M., & Shah, S. I. A. (2019). Patient satisfaction with health care services; an
application of physician’s behavior as a moderator. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
16(18), 3318. doi:10.3390/ijerph16183318 PMID:31505840
Marroni, S. P., Radaelli, G., Silva, I. G. D., & Portuguez, M. W. (2017). Instruments for evaluating financial management
capacity among the elderly: An integrative literature review. Revista Brasileira de Geriatria e Gerontologia, 20(4),
582–593. doi:10.1590/1981-22562017020.160207
Marson, D. (2015). Investigating functional impairment in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. The Journal of Prevention
of Alzheimer’s Disease, 2(1), 4. doi:10.14283/jpad.2015.44 PMID:26855935
Marson, D. (2016). Conceptual models and guidelines for clinical assessment of financial capacity. Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology, 31(6), 541–553. doi:10.1093/arclin/acw052 PMID:27506235
Marson, D. C. (2013). Clinical and ethical aspects of financial capacity in dementia: A commentary. The American
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(4), 382–390. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.033 PMID:23498385
Marson, D. C., Sawrie, S. M., Snyder, S., McInturff, B., Stalvey, T., Boothe, A., Aldridge, T., Chatterjee, A., & Harrell,
L. E. (2000). Assessing financial capacity in patients with Alzheimer disease: A conceptual model and prototype instrument.
Archives of Neurology, 57(6), 877–884. doi:10.1001/archneur.57.6.877 PMID:10867786
Marson, D. C., Triebel, K. L., & Knight, A. J. (2012). Assessment of financial capacity: A neuropsychological perspective.
In G. J. Demakis (Ed.), Civil capacities in clinical neuropsychology (pp. 39–68). Oxford University Press.
Martin, L. G., Schoeni, R. F., & Andreski, P. M. (2010). Trends in health of older adults in the United States: past, present,
future. Demography, 47 Suppl(Suppl 1), S17–S40. doi:10.1353/dem.2010.0003
Martin, R. C., Triebel, K. L., Kennedy, R. E., Nicholas, A. P., Watts, R. L., Stover, N. P., Brandon, M., & Marson, D.
C. (2013). Impaired financial abilities in Parkinson’s disease patients with mild cognitive impairment and dementia.
Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, 19(11), 986–990. doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.06.017 PMID:23899743
338
Compilation of References
Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Harrell, L., Zamrini, E., Anderson, B., Bartolucci, A., & Marson, D. (2008). Declining
financial capacity in patients with mild Alzheimer disease: A one-year longitudinal study. The American Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(3), 209–219. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e318157cb00 PMID:18263665
Masala, C., & Petretto, D. R. (2008). From disablement to enablement: Conceptual models of disability in the 20th
century. Disability and Rehabilitation, 30(17), 1233–1244. doi:10.1080/09638280701602418 PMID:18821191
Mast, B. T. (2011). Whole person dementia assessment. Health Professions Press, Inc.
Masten, A., & Wright, M. (1998). Cumulative risk and protection models of child maltreatment. Journal of Aggression,
Maltreatment & Trauma, 2(1), 7–30. doi:10.1300/J146v02n01_02
Matias-Guiu, J. A., Cortés-Martínez, A., Valles-Salgado, M., Rognoni, T., Fernández-Matarrubia, M., Moreno-Ramos,
T., & Matías-Guiu, J. (2017). Addenbrooke’s cognitive examination III: Diagnostic utility for mild cognitive impairment
and dementia and correlation with standardized neuropsychological tests. International Psychogeriatrics, 29(1), 105–113.
Mattap, S. M., Mohan, D., McGrattan, A. M., Allotey, P., Stephan, B. C. M., Reidpath, D. D., Siervo, M., Robinson,
L., & Chaiyakunapruk, N. (2022). The economic burden of dementia in low-and middle-income countries (LMICs): A
systematic review. BMJ Global Health, 7(4), e007409.
McConville K. & Ludecke, M. (2019). Practice what you preach: research-based theatre as a method to investigate drama
teacher professional identity. Drama Australia journal 43(2), 83-99.
McDermott, S., & Turk, M. A. (2011). The myth and reality of disability prevalence: Measuring disability for research
and service. Disability and Health Journal, 4(1), 1–5. doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2010.06.002 PMID:21168800
McDonagh, F., & Finneran, M. (2017). The teacher as co-creator of drama: A phenomenological study of the experiences
and reflections of Irish primary school teachers. Irish Educational Studies, 36(2), 169–183. doi:10.1080/03323
315.2017.1324806
Mcmanus, K., Greene, B., Ader, L., & Caulfield, B. (2022). Development of a Data-Driven Metrics for Balance Impairment
and Fall Risk Assessment in Older Adults (pp 2324-2332). IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 69(7). IEEE.
Mehta, S., Rigney, A., Webb, K., Wesney, J., Stratford, P. W., Shuler, F. D., & Oliashirazi, A. (2020). Characterizing
the recovery trajectories of knee range of motion for one year after total knee replacement. Physiotherapy Theory and
Practice, 36(1), 176–185. doi:10.1080/09593985.2018.1482980 PMID:29897271
Mello, E. C., Regalo, S. C. H., Diniz, L. H., Lage, J. B., Ribeiro, M. F., Bevilacqua, D. E. Junior, Rosa, R. C., Ferreira,
A. A., Ferraz, M. L. F., & Teixeira, V. (2020). Electromyographic analysis of stomatognathic muscles in elderly after
hippotherapy. PLoS One, 15(8), e0238036. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0238036 PMID:32853244
Mendes, F., & Xavier, P. (2017). A Ordem Jurídica Portuguesa e os Direitos da Pessoa Idosa. Millenium, 2, 135–140.
Messinis, L., Nasios, G., Mougias, A., Politis, A., Zampakis, P., Tsiamaki, E., Malefaki, S., Gourzis, P., & Papathanasopoulos,
P. (2016). Age and education adjusted normative data and discriminative validity for Rey’s Auditory Verbal
Learning Test in the elderly Greek population. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 38(1), 23–39.
Meyer, M., Constancias, F., Vogel, T., Kaltenbach, G., & Schmitt, E. (2020). Gait Disorder among Elderly People, Psychomotor
Disadaptation Syndrome: Post-Fall Syndrome, Risk Factors and Follow-Up–A Cohort Study of 70 Patients.
Gerontology, 1–8. PMID:33254165
Mielenz, T. J., Kannoth, S., Jia, H., Pullyblank, K., Sorensen, J., Estabrooks, P., Stevens, J. A., & Strogatz, D. (2020).
Evaluating a two-level vs. three-level fall risk screening algorithm for predicting falls among older adults. Frontiers in
Public Health, 8, 8. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00373 PMID:32903603
339
Compilation of References
Miles, S., Howlett, C. A., Berryman, C., Nedeljkovic, M., Moseley, G. L., & Phillipou, A. (2021). Considerations for
using the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test to assess cognitive flexibility. Behavior Research Methods, 53(5), 2083–2091.
Minayo, M. C. S., & Cavalante, F. G. (2010). Suicídio entre pessoas idosas: revisão da literatura. Revista Saúde Pública,
44(4), 750-757. São Paulo. doi:10.1590/S0034-89102010000400020
Mini-Cog©. (2022). The Mini-Cog© is a fast and simple screening test to help detect dementia in its early stages.Mini-
Cog©. https://mini-cog.com/
Ministério dos Negócios, E. (2022). Património Mundial de Portugal. UNESCO. https://unescoportugal.mne.gov.pt/pt/
temas/proteger-o-nosso-patrimonio-e-promover-a-criatividade/patrimonio-mundial-em-portugal
Ministry of Labor and Social Policy (2019). Правилник за начинот и обемот на социјалните услуги, нормативите и
стандардите за давање на социјалните услуги помош и нега во домот. Official Gazette of R. North Macedonia,.268.
Minuchin, S. (2005). Familias y terapia familiar. Colección Terapia Familiar. Gedisa Editorial.
Misra, S., Bera, S., Mondal, A., Tirkey, R., Chao, H. C., & Chattopadhyay, S. (2014). Optimal gateway selection in sensorcloud
framework for health monitoring (pp 61-68). IET Wireless Sensor Systems, 4, 2. doi:10.1049/iet-wss.2013.0073
Mitchell, M., & Miller, L. S. (2008). Prediction of functional status in older adults: The ecological validity of four
Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System tests. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 30(6), 683–690.
doi:10.1080/13803390701679893 PMID:18608647
Mitrushina, M., Boone, K. B., Razani, J., & D’Elia, L. F. (2005). Handbook of normative data for neuropsychological
assessment. Oxford University Press.
Moberg, P. J., & Rick, J. H. (2008). Decision-making capacity and competency in the elderly: A clinical and neuropsychological
perspective. NeuroRehabilitation, 23(5), 403–413. doi:10.3233/NRE-2008-23504 PMID:18957727
Monastero, R., Mangialasche, F., Camarda, C., Ercolani, S., & Camarda, R. (2009). A systematic review of neuropsychiatric
symptoms in mild cognitive impairment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 18(1), 11–30.
Montero-Odasso, M.M., Kamkar, N., Pieruccini-Faria, F., Osman, A., Sarquis-Adamson, Y., Close, J., & ... Task Force
on Global Guidelines for Falls in Older Adults. (2021). Evaluation of Clinical Practice Guidelines on Fall Prevention
and Management for Older Adults: A Systematic Review. JAMA Network Open, 1, e2138911.
Montero-Odasso, M., van der Velde, N., Martin, F.C., Petrovic, M., Tan, M.P., & Ryg, J. (2022). World guidelines for
falls prevention and management for older adults: A global initiative. Age and Ageing, 2, 1–36.
Montesinos, L., Castaldo, R., & Pecchia, L. (2018). Wearable Inertial Sensors for Fall Risk Assessment and Prediction
in Older Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis (pp 573-582). IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engenheering, 26(3). IEEE.
Moon, Y. W., Kim, H. J., Ahn, H. S., & Lee, D. H. (2016). Serial Changes of Quadriceps and Hamstring Muscle Strength
Following Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Meta-Analysis. PLoS One, 11(2), e0148193. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148193
PMID:26849808
Moore, D. J., Palmer, B. W., Patterson, T. L., & Jeste, D. V. (2007). A review of performance-based measures of functional
living skills. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 41(1-2), 97–118. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2005.10.008 PMID:16360706
Moracco, K. E., & Cole, T. B. (2009). Preventing intimate partner violence: Screening is not enough. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 302(5), 568–570. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.1135 PMID:19654392
340
Compilation of References
Mordi, J. A., & Ciuffreda, K. J. (1998). Static aspects of accommodation: Age and presbyopia. Vision Research, 38(11),
1643–1653. doi:10.1016/S0042-6989(97)00336-2 PMID:9747501
Moreland, B., Kakara, R., & Henry, A. (2020). Trends in nonfatal falls and fall-related injuries among adults aged≥
65 years—United States, 2012–2018. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(27), 875–881. doi:10.15585/mmwr.
mm6927a5 PMID:32644982
Mosadeghrad, A. M. (2014). Factors influencing healthcare service quality. International Journal of Health Policy and
Management, 3(2), 77–89. doi:10.15171/ijhpm.2014.65 PMID:25114946
Moye, J. (1996). Theoretical frameworks for competency in cognitively impaired elderly adults. Journal of Aging Studies,
10(1), 27–42. doi:10.1016/S0890-4065(96)90015-8
Moye, J., Armesto, J. C., & Karel, M. J. (2005). Evaluating capacity of older adults in rehabilitation settings: Conceptual
models and clinical challenges. Rehabilitation Psychology, 50(3), 207–214. doi:10.1037/0090-5550.50.3.207
Moye, J., & Marson, D. C. (2007). Assessment of decision-making capacity in older adults: An emerging area of practice
and research. The Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 62(1), 3–P11.
doi:10.1093/geronb/62.1.P3 PMID:17284555
Muchna, A., Najafi, B., Wendel, C. S., Schwenk, M., Armstrong, D. G., & Mohler, J. (2018). Foot problems in older
adults: Associations with incident falls, frailty syndrome, and sensor-derived gait, balance, and physical activity measures.
Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association, 108(2), 126–139. doi:10.7547/15-186 PMID:28853612
Murdoch, V. (2019). Patient concordance in the management of chronic oedema: role of the independent prescriber.
British Journal of Community Nursing, 24(Sup4), S6–S10. doi:10.12968/bjcn.2019.24.Sup4.S6
Murphy, L., & Helmick, C. G. (2012). The impact of osteoarthritis in the United States: A population-health perspective.
The American Journal of Nursing, 112(3, Suppl 1), S13–S19. doi:10.1097/01.NAJ.0000412646.80054.21 PMID:22373741
Mutsuzaki, H., Takeuchi, R., Mataki, Y., & Wadano, Y. (2017). Target range of motion for rehabilitation after total knee
arthroplasty. Journal of Rural Medicine: JRM, 12(1), 33–37. doi:10.2185/jrm.2923 PMID:28593015
Nagi, S. Z. (1976). An epidemiology of disability among adults in the United States. The Milbank Memorial Fund
Quarterly. Health and Society, 54(4), 439–467. doi:10.2307/3349677 PMID:137366
Naik, A. D., Concato, J., & Gill, T. M. (2004). Bathing disability in community-living older persons: Common, consequential,
and complex. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 52(11), 1805–1810. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52513.x
PMID:15507055
Naik, A. D., & Gill, T. M. (2005). Underutilization of environmental adaptations for bathing in community-living
older persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(9), 1497–1503. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53458.x
PMID:16137278
Nasreddine, Z. S., Phillips, N. A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I., & Chertkow, H. (2005). The
Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society, 53(4), 695–699. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x PMID:15817019
Nasreddine, Z. S., Phillips, N. A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I., Cummings, J. L., & Chertkow,
H. (2005). The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. Journal
of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(4), 695–699.
National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. (2016). Informing social security’s process for financial
capability determination (P. S. Appelbaum, C. M. Spicer, & F. R. Valliere, Eds.). National Academies Press.
341
Compilation of References
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. (2018). The dementia care pathway: Full implementation guidance.
NCCMH. https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/docs/default-source/improving-care/nccmh/dementia/nccmh-dementia-carepathway-
full-implementation-guidance.pdf?sfvrsn=cdef189d_8
National Health Service. (2020a). Tests for diagnosing dementia. NHS. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/dementia/
diagnosis-tests/
National Health Service. (2020b). What are the treatments for dementia? Dementia guide. NHS. https://www.nhs.uk/
conditions/dementia/treatment/
National Institute for Health an Care Excellence. (2018). Dementia: assessment, management and support for people
living with dementia and their carers. NICE Guideline [NG97]. https://www.nice.org.uk/
National Institute for Health an Care Excellence. (2021). Dementia. NIHCE. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/dementia/
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). (2019). 2019 surveillance of falls in older people: assessing
risk and prevention (NICE guideline CG161). Surveillance report. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK551819/
National Institutes of Health. (2021). Cultural Respect. NIH. https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nih-office-director/
office-communications-public-liaison/clear-communication/cultural-respect
Navaratnarajah, A., & Jackson, S. H. (2017). The physiology of ageing. Medicine, 45(1), 6–10. doi:10.1016/j.
mpmed.2016.10.008 PMID:28065164
Naylor, J. M., Yeo, A. E., Mittal, R., Ko, V. W., & Harris, I. A. (2012). Improvements in knee range and symptomatic
and functional behavior after knee arthroplasty based on preoperative restriction in range. The Journal of Arthroplasty,
27(6), 1100–1105. doi:10.1016/j.arth.2011.09.023 PMID:22054903
Nelson, T. D. (2005). Ageism: Prejudice against our feared future self. The Journal of Social Issues, 61(2), 207–221.
doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2005.00402.x
Neogi, T., & Zhang, Y. (2013). Epidemiology of osteoarthritis. Rheumatic Diseases Clinics of North America, 39(1),
1–19. doi:10.1016/j.rdc.2012.10.004 PMID:23312408
Ng, A., Chew, I., Narasimhalu, K., & Kandiah, N. (2013). Effectiveness of Montreal Cognitive Assessment for the diagnosis
of mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease in Singapore. Singapore Medical Journal, 54(11), 616–619.
Ng, H. K., Cheung, R., Poon, C. Y. M., Lee, S. S., & Chan, W. M. (2019). Positive psychology interventions in enhancing
elderly’s well-being: A comparison between reminiscence therapy and self-determination theory. Aging & Mental
Health, 23(1), 96–102. doi:10.1080/13607863.2017.1399379
Niekawa, N., Sakuraba, Y., Uto, H., Kumazawa, Y., & Matsuda, O. (2007). Relationship between financial competence
and cognitive function in patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 61(5), 455–461.
doi:10.1111/j.1440-1819.2007.01693.x PMID:17875022
Ning, H., Li, R., Ye, X., Zhang, Y., & Liu, L. (2020). A review on serious games for dementia care in ageing societies.
IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, 8, 1–11.
Nishijima, D. K., Lin, A. L., Weiss, R. E., Yagapen, A. N., Malveau, S. E., Adler, D. H., Bastani, A., Baugh, C. W.,
Caterino, J. M., Clark, C. L., Diercks, D. B., Hollander, J. E., Nicks, B. A., Shah, M. N., Stiffler, K. A., Storrow, A.
B., Wilber, S. T., & Sun, B. C. (2018). ECG predictors of cardiac arrhythmias in older adults with syncope. Annals of
Emergency Medicine, 71(4), 452–461. doi:10.1016/j.annemergmed.2017.11.014 PMID:29275946
342
Compilation of References
Nogueira, J., Freitas, S., Duro, D., Almeida, J., & Santana, I. (2018). Validation study of the Alzheimer’s disease assessment
scale–cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) for the Portuguese patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s
disease. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 32(sup1), 46–59.
Norkin, C. C., & White, D. J. (2009). Measurement of Joint Motion. A Guide to Goniometry. FA Davis Co.
Nowrangi, M. A., Outen, J. D., Naaz, F., Chen, L., Bakker, A., Munro, C. A., & Rosenberg, P. B. (2022). Altered angular
gyrus resting state functional connectivity associated with financial capacity in Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of
Alzheimer’s Disease, 1-9.
Nunes, C., Lemos, I., Ayala-Nunes, L., & Costa, D. (2013). Acontecimentos de vida stressantes e apoio social em famílias
em risco psicossocial. Psicologia, Saúde & Doenças, 14(2), 313–320.
Nunes, C., Lemos, I., Costa, D., Nunes, L., & Almeida, A. (2011). Social support and stressful life events in portuguese
multi-problem families. International Journal of Developmental and Educational Psychology, 5(1), 497–505.
Nyhus, E., & Barceló, F. (2009). The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and the cognitive assessment of prefrontal executive
functions: A critical update. Brain and Cognition, 71(3), 437–451.
O’connor, P. J. (1990). Normative data: Their definition, interpretation, and importance for primary care physicians.
Family Medicine, 22(4), 307–311.
O’Leary, N., Salmon, N., & Clifford, A. M. (2020). ‘It benefits patient care’: The value of practice-based IPE in healthcare
curriculums. BMC Medical Education, 20, 424.
O’Neill, N., & Peisah, C. (2011). Capacity and the law. Sydney University Press.
OECD. (2021). Preventing Harmful Alcohol Use. OECD Health Policy Studies, OECD Publishing. doi:10.1787/6e4b4ffb-en
OGRNM. (2019). Law on Social Protection of Elderly People. Official Gazette of the Republic of North Macedonia
(OGRNM), 104.
Okonkwo, O. C., Wadley, V. G., Griffith, H. R., Ball, K., & Marson, D. C. (2006). Cognitive correlates of financial abilities
in mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 54(11), 1745–1750. doi:10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2006.00916.x PMID:17087703
Okonkwo, O. C., Wadley, V. G., Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Lanza, S., Zamrini, E. Y., Harrell, L. E., Brockington, J. C.,
Clark, D., Raman, R., & Marson, D. C. (2008). Awareness of deficits in financial abilities in patients with mild cognitive
impairment: Going beyond self-informant discrepancy. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(8), 650–659.
doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e31817e8a9d PMID:18669943
Oliveira, R. I. L. (2018). Rede Nacional de Cuidados Continuados Integrados (RNCCI): Um estudo aprofundado sobre
a eficácia e eficiência do seu desenho e funcionamento nomeadamente em Cuidados de Reabilitação. [Master Thesis
in Health Resource Management. Tomar: Instituto Politécnico de Tomar, Escola Superior de Gestão de Tomar]. http://
hdl.handle.net/10400.26/28548
Oliveira, R. I., Brou, E. M. A., & Damásio, C. P. (2020). Processo de Referenciação para a RNCCI. Análise através da
Reengenharia de Processos. In: Nunes, L.; Poeira, A. F.; Canais, E. (Coord.) (2020) Livro do I Congresso. Gestão em
Enfermagem. Percursos e Desafios. Departamento de Enfermagem ESS-IPS, p. 145. 10.13140/RG.2.2.36566.19523
Oliveira, R. I., Damásio, C. P., & Brou, E. M. A. (2020). Referenciação e Cuidados de Reabilitação na RNCCI: Estudo de
Caso. In: Nunes, L.; Poeira, A. F.; Canais, E. (Coord.) (2020) Livro do I Congresso. Gestão em Enfermagem. Percursos
e Desafios. Departamento de Enfermagem ESS-IPS, p. 144. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.3321075203
343
Compilation of References
Oliveira, C. R. (2021). Indicadores de integração de imigrantes: relatório estatístico anual 2021. (Imigração em Números
– Relatórios Anuais 6) . 1st ed.). Observatório das Migrações.
Oliveira, J. (2008). Psicologia do Idoso. Temas Complementares. Legis Editora.
Omorogbe, C. E. (2018). Socio-Economic Factors Influencing in-Patient Satisfaction With Health Care At the University
of Benin Teaching Hospital (Ubth), Benin City, Nigeria. Ijnmhrc, 4(4), 63–80. http://www.eajournals.org/wp-content/
uploads/Socio-Economic-Factors-Influencing-in-Patient-Satisfaction-With-Health-Care-at-the-University-of-Benin-
Teaching-Hospital-UBTH-Benin-City-Nigeria.pdf [Accessed 19/12/19]
Ordem dos Psicólogos, P. (2022). Intervenção Psicológica com Adultos mais Velhos. Manual de Apoio Pedagógico.
Documento Não publicado (4ª edição), Lisboa.
Order Nr 12427/2016, 17/10. Criação do grupo de trabalho interministerial para apresentar uma proposta de Estratégia
Nacional para o Envelhecimento Ativo e Saudável. Diário da República, 2ª Série, Nº 199, p. 30783 – 30784.
Ordinance Nr 67/2012, 21/03. Condições de Organização, Funcionamento e Instalação das Estruturas Residenciais
para Idosos. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 58, p. 1324 – 1329.
Ordinance Nr 96/2013, 04/03. Condições de Instalação e Funcionamento dos Estabelecimentos de Apoio Social - Centro
de Noite. Diário da República, 1ª Série, Nº 58, p. 1324 – 1329.
Orem, D. E. (2001). Nursing: Concepts of practice (6th ed.). Mosby.
Ostchega, Y., Dillon, C. F., Lindle, R., Carroll, M., & Hurley, B. F. (2004). Isokinetic leg muscle strength in older americans
and its relationship to a standardized walk test: Data from the national health and nutrition examination survey 1999-2000.
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 52(6), 977–982. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52268.x PMID:15161465
Pachana, N. A., Byrne, G. J., Wilson, J., Tilse, C., Pinsker, D. M., Massavelli, B., Vearncombe, K. J., & Mitchell, L. K.
(2014). Predictors of financial capacity performance in older adults using the Financial Competence Assessment Inventory.
International Psychogeriatrics, 26(6), 921–927. doi:10.1017/S1041610214000209 PMID:24571738
Padrón-Monedero, A., Pastor-Barriuso, R., García López, F. J., Martínez Martín, P., & Damián, J. (2020). Falls and
long-term survival among older adults residing in care homes. PLoS One, 15(5), e0231618.
Pajala, S. (2012). Iäkkäiden kaatumisten ehkäisy. [Finnish institute for health and welfare]. Opas, 16. https://www.julkari.
fi/bitstream/handle/10024/79998/THL_Opas_16_verkko.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Panel on Prevention of Falls in Older Persons, American Geriatrics Society and British Geriatrics Society. (2011). Summary
of the Updated American Geriatrics Society/British Geriatrics Society clinical practice guideline for prevention of
falls in older persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 59(1), 148–157.
Pangman, V. C., Sloan, J., & Guse, L. (2000). An examination of psychometric properties of the Mini-Mental State
Examination and the standardized Mini-Mental State Examination: Implications for clinical practice. Applied Nursing
Research, 13(4), 209–213. https://doi.org/10.1053/apnr.2000.9231
Pan, Q., Zhang, Y., Long, T., He, W., Zhang, S., Fan, Y., & Zhou, J. (2018). Diagnosis of Vertigo and dizziness syndromes
in a neurological outpatient clinic. European Neurology, 79(5-6), 287–294.
Paolo, A. M., Tröster, A. I., Blackwell, K. T., Koller, W. C., & Axelrod, B. N. (1996). Utility of a Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test short form in persons with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 18(6), 892–897.
344
Compilation of References
Parent, E., & Moffet, H. (2002). Comparative responsiveness of locomotor tests and questionnaires used to follow early
recovery after total knee arthroplasty. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 83(1), 70–80. doi:10.1053/
apmr.2002.27337 PMID:11782835
Parsley, B. S., Engh, G. A., & Dwyer, K. A. (1992). Preoperative flexion. Does it influence postoperative flexion after
posterior-cruciate-retaining total knee arthroplasty? Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, (275), 204–210.
PMID:1735215
Patel, M., & Patel, N. (2019). Exploring Research Methodology: Review Article. International Journal of Research and
Review Keywords: Research, Methodology, Research Methodology, 6(March), 48–55. www.ijrrjournal.com
Patricacou, A., Psallida, E., Pring, T., & Dipper, L. (2007). The Boston Naming Test in Greek: Normative data and the
effects of age and education on naming. Aphasiology, 21(12), 1157–1170.
Paúl, C., & Fonseca, A. (2001). Psicossociologia da Saúde. Climepsi Editores.
Pearson, J. L., & Brown, G. K. (2000). Suicide prevention in late life: Directions for science and practice. Clinical Psychology
Review, 20(6), 685–705. doi:10.1016/S0272-7358(99)00066-5 PMID:10983264
Peel, N. M., McClure, R. J., & Bartlett, H. P. (2005, April). Behavioral determinants of healthy aging. American Journal
of Preventive Medicine, 28(3), 298–304. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2004.12.002 PMID:15766620
Peisah, C., Forlenza, O., & Chiu, E. (2009). Ethics, capacity, and decision-making in the practice of old age psychiatry: An
emerging dialogue. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 22(6), 519–521. doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e32833058e3 PMID:19654546
Pereira, J., Teixeir, J., Lopes, I., & Sousa, F. (2020). Evolution of SmartBEAT for Heart Failure Telemonitoring. Studies
in Health Technology and Informatics, 273, 189–194. doi:10.3233/SHTI200637 PMID:33087611
Perera C., Zaslavsky A., Christen P. & Georgakopoulos D. (2014). Sensing as a Service Model for Smart Cities supported
by Internet of Things. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies. John Wiley and Sons.
Perneczky, R., Wagenpfeil, S., Komossa, K., Grimmer, T., Diehl, J., & Kurz, A. (2006). Mapping scores onto stages: Minimental
state examination and clinical dementia rating. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14(2), 139–144.
Peters, M. D., Godfrey, C., McInerney, P., Munn, Z., Tricco, A. C., & Khalil, H. (2020.). Chapter 11: Scoping reviews. In
Aromataris, E. & Munn, Z. (Eds.), JBI manual for evidence synthesis. https://synthesismanual.jbi.global. doi:10.46658/
JBIMES-20-12
Petersen, R. C. (2016). Mild cognitive impairment. CONTINUUM: Lifelong Learning in Neurology, 22(2 Dementia), 404.
Petrolo, R., Loscri, V., & Mitton, N. (2017). Towards a smart city based on cloud of things, a survey on the smart city vision
and paradigms (28, e2931). Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Petrovic, D., de Mestral, C., Bochud, M., Bartley, M., Kivimäki, M., Vineis, P., & Stringhini, S. (2018). The contribution
of health behaviors to socioeconomic inequalities in health: A systematic review. Preventive Medicine, 113, 15–31.
Pillemer, K., Burnes, D., Riffin, C., & Lachs, M. S. (2016). Elder Abuse: Global Situation, Risk Factors, and Prevention
Strategies. The Gerontologist, 56(2, Suppl 2), 194–205. doi:10.1093/geront/gnw004 PMID:26994260
Pillemer, K., & Finkelhor, D. (1988). The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The Gerontologist, 28(1),
51–57. doi:10.1093/geront/28.1.51 PMID:3342992
Pinquart, M., & Forstmeier, S. (2012). Effects of reminiscence interventions on psychosocial outcomes: A meta-analysis.
Aging & Mental Health, 16(5), 541–558. doi:10.1080/13607863.2011.651434 PMID:22304736
345
Compilation of References
Pinsker, D. M., Pachana, N. A., Wilson, J., Tilse, C., & Byrne, G. J. (2010). Financial capacity in older adults: A review
of clinical assessment approaches and considerations. Clinical Gerontologist, 33(4), 332–346. doi:10.1080/07317115.
2010.502107
Pinto, A. (2021). Inflamação e envelhecimento: verdade ou consequência? In Barradas, S. & Oliveira, A., (1ª Edição),
Agenda Científica de Gerontologia. “Aprender, Envelhecer…Ser” (pp. 17-20). Editora Alma Letra. Coimbra.
Pinto, E., & Peters, R. (2009). Literature review of the Clock Drawing Test as a tool for cognitive screening. Dementia
and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 27(3), 201–213.
Pinto, J. M., Fontes, A., Paredes, J., & Santos, S. (2019). Promoting reminiscence through a meaning in life intervention
with older adults. European Journal of Ageing, 16(2), 221–230. doi:10.100710433-018-0494-x
Plotkin, D. A., Spar, J. E., & Horwitz, H. L. (2016). Assessing undue influence. The Journal of the American Academy
of Psychiatry and the Law, 44, 344–351. PMID:27644868
Podhorna, J., Krahnke, T., Shear, M., & Harrison, E, J. (2016). Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale–Cognitive subscale
variants in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease: Change over time and the effect of enrichment
strategies. Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy, 8(1), 1–13.
Poptsi, E., Moraitou, D., Eleftheriou, M., Kounti-Zafeiropoulou, F., Papasozomenou, C., Agogiatou, C., Bakoglidou,
E., Batsila, G., Liapi, D., & Markou, N. (2019). Normative data for the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in Greek older
adults with subjective cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment and dementia. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and
Neurology, 32(5), 265–274.
Pordata (2023, February, 27th) Óbitos de residentes em Portugal por algumas causas de morte. Pordata. https://www.
pordata.pt/db/portugal/ambiente+de+consulta/tabela
PORDATA. (2022). Estatísticas sobre Portugal e Europa. PORDATA. https://www.pordata.pt/portugal
Pordata. (2022). Portuguese aging index statistics. Pordata. https://www.pordata.pt/portugal/indice+de+envelhecimen
to+e+outros+indicadores+de+envelhecimento-526
PORDATA. (2023). Estatísticas sobre Portugal e Europa. PORDATA. https://www.pordata.pt/europa
Portugal, Ministry of Health, General Direction of Health. (2021) Programa Nacional para a Prevenção e Controlo
do Tabagismo 2020. Lisboa: Direção Geral da Saúde. https://www.dgs.pt/portal-da-estatistica-da-saude/diretorio-deinformacao/
diretorio-de-informacao/por-serie-1219790-pdf.aspx?v=%3d%3dDwAAAB%2bLCAAAAAAABAArySz
ItzVUy81MsTU1MDAFAHzFEfkPAAAA
Portuguesa, R. Serviço Nacional de Saúde (RP, SNS) (2017). Estratégia Nacional para o Envelhecimento Ativo e Saudável
2017-2025. ANMP. https://www.anmp.pt/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/198a.pdf
Portuguesa, R., & Estrangeiros, N. (2022) Sobre Portugal. Portal Diplomatico. https://portaldiplomatico.mne.gov.pt/
sobre-portugal
Portuguese Social Security. (2021). Idosos. PSS. https://www.seg-social.pt/idosos
Posener, H. D., & Jacoby, R. (2002). Testamentary capacity. In R. Jacoby & C. Oppenheimer (Eds.), Psychiatry in the
elderly (pp. 932–940). Oxford University Press.
Prince, M. J., Wu, F., Guo, Y., Robledo, L. M. G., O’Donnell, M., Sullivan, R., & Yusuf, S. (2015). The burden of disease
in older people and implications for health policy and practice. Lancet, 385(9967), 549–562.
346
Compilation of References
Qassem, T., Khater, M. S., Emara, T., Rasheedy, D., Tawfik, H. M., Mohammedin, A. S., Tolba, M. F., El-Gabry, D. A.,
Aziz, K. A., & Saber, H. G. (2021). Validation of the Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination in Mild Cognitive
Impairment in Arabic Speakers. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 50(2), 178–182.
Qassem, T., Khater, M. S., Emara, T., Rasheedy, D., Tawfik, H. M., Mohammedin, A. S., Tolba, M. F., Saber, H. G.,
El-Gabry, D. A., & Aziz, K. A. (2020). Adaptation and Validation of the Mini-Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination
in Dementia in Arabic Speakers in Egypt. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 49(6), 611–616.
Quinn, M. J., Nerenberg, L., Navarro, A. E., & Wilber, K. H. (2017). Developing an undue influence screening tool for
Adult Protective Services. Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect, 29(2-3), 157–185. doi:10.1080/08946566.2017.131484
4 PMID:28398137
Radaelli, R., Trajano, G. S., Freitas, S. R., Izquierdo, M., Cadore, E. L., & Pinto, R. S. (2023). Power Training Prescription
in Older Individuals: Is It Safe and Effective to Promote Neuromuscular Functional Improvements? Sports Medicine
(Auckland, N.Z.), 53(3), 569–576. doi:10.100740279-022-01758-0 PMID:36036337
Radulovic, M. (2017). The Family in the Transition Process in the Republic of Macedonia. Sociological Review. http://
hdl.handle.net/20.500.12188/1837
Ramalho, A., & Ramalho, J. (2014). A relevância da formação em Gerontologia Social na implementação de políticas
sociais em Portugal”. In Luz, H. & Miguel, I.: Gerontologia Social. Perspetivas de Análise de Intervenção. Coimbra:
Centro de Investigação em Inovação Social e Organizacional (CIS), Instituto Superior Bissaya Barreto.
Rami, L., Serradell, M., Bosch, B., Caprile, C., Sekler, A., Villar, A., Canal, R., & Molinuevo, J. L. (2008). Normative
data for the Boston Naming Test and the Pyramids and Palm Trees Test in the elderly Spanish population. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 30(1), 1–6.
Ramos, P. (2020). Avaliação do impacto da operação Censos Sénior, desenvolvida pela Guarda Nacional Republicana,
na prevenção criminal. Instituto Universitário Militar Departamento de Estudos Pós-Graduados.
Rasmusson, X. D., Zonderman, A. B., Kawas, C., & Resnick, S. M. (1998). Effects of age and dementia on the Trail
Making Test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 12(2), 169–178.
Rea, I. M. (2017). Towards ageing well: Use it or lose it: Exercise, epigenetics, and cognition. Biogerontology, 18(4),
679–691.
Reay, A. M. C., & Browne, K. D. (2002). The effectiveness of psychological interventions with individuals
who physically abuse or neglect their elderly dependents. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 17(4), 416–431.
doi:10.1177/0886260502017004005
Rector, J. L., Marceau, K., & Friedman, E. M. (2020). Moderation of the Association Between Chronic Medical Conditions
and Functional Limitations Over Time by Physical Activity: Effects of Age. The Journals of Gerontology. Series
A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 75(1), 168–174. doi:10.1093/gerona/glz020 PMID:30783672
Red Cross of Republic of Macedonia. (2017). The Need of Social and Healthcare Services for Elderly People. The Red
Cross. http://inkluzivam.org/wp-content/uploads/2007/12/Izvestaj-MK.pdf
Regulatory Decree n.º 1/2022, de 10 de janeiro. Diário da República, 1. ª Série, n.º 6.
Regulatory Decree Nr 1/2022, 10/01. Estabelece os termos e as condições do reconhecimento do estatuto do cuidador
informal bem como as medidas de apoio aos cuidadores informais e às pessoas cuidadas . Diário da República, 1ª Série,
Nº 6, p. 321 – 36.
347
Compilation of References
Reimann, P., Brucker, M., Arbab, D., & Lüring, C. (2019). Patient satisfaction - A comparison between patient-specific
implants and conventional total knee arthroplasty. Journal of Orthopaedics, 16(3), 273–277. doi:10.1016/j.jor.2019.03.020
PMID:31015755
Resolução do Conselho de Ministros n-º 63/2015, de 25 de agosto. Estratégia de Proteção ao Idoso. Diário da República,
1. ª Série, n.º 165.
Reyes, J. R., Álvarez, L. N. R., & Pomarede, M. J. M. (2018). Pedagogical aspects in nursing education: Integrative
review. Investigacion y Educacion en Enfermeria, 36(3), 1–17.
Ribeiro, J. L. (1999). Escala de Satisfação com o Suporte Social (ESSS). Análise Psicológica, 17(3), 547–558.
Ricci, M., Graef, S., Blundo, C., & Miller, L. A. (2012). Using the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) to
differentiate Alzheimer’s dementia and behavioural variant fronto-temporal dementia. The Clinical Neuropsychologist,
26(6), 926–941.
Rice, J. B., White, A. G., Scarpati, L. M., Wan, G., & Nelson, W. W. (2017). Long-term systemic corticosteroid exposure:
A systematic literature review. Clinical Therapeutics, 39(11), 2216–2229.
Richardson, T., Jansen, M., & Fitch, C. (2018). Financial difficulties in bipolar disorder part 1: Longitudinal relationships
with mental health. Journal of Mental Health (Abingdon, England), 27(6), 595–601. doi:10.1080/09638237.201
8.1521920 PMID:30445874
Riegelman, R., & Kirkwood, B. (2014). Public Health 101. Healthy People – Healthy Populations (2nd ed.). Jones &
Bartlett Publishers.
Rodrigo, M. J., Máiquez, M. L., Martín, J. C., & Byrne, S. (2008). Preservación familiar. Un enfoque positivo para la
intervención con familias. Pirámide.
Rodrigo, M. J., Martín, J. C., Máiquez, M. L., & Rodríguez, G. (2007). Informal and formal supports and maternal childrearing
practices in at-risk and non at-risk psychosocial contexts. Children and Youth Services Review, 29(3), 329–347.
doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2006.03.010
Romano, A., & Romano, R. (2020). Gas Exchange and Control of Breathing in Elderly and End-of-Life Diseases. In
Ventilatory Support and Oxygen Therapy in Elder, Palliative and End-of-Life Care Patients (pp. 15–20). Springer.
Roshandel, M., Rakhshan, M., & Najafi Kalyani, M. (2021). The Effect of Using Peer on Self-Care, Quality of Life, and Adherence
in Elderly People with Coronary Artery Disease. TheScientificWorldJournal, 2021, 1–7. doi:10.1155/2021/4770721
PMID:34916875
Ross, T. P., Lichtenberg, P. A., & Christensen, B. K. (1995). Normative data on the Boston Naming Test for elderly adults
in a demographically diverse medical sample. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 9(4), 321–325.
Royall, D. R., Palmer, R., Chiodo, L. K., & Polk, M. J. (2004). Declining executive control in normal aging predicts
change in functional status: The Freedom House Study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 52(3), 346–352.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52104.x PMID:14962147
Rubiño, J. A., Gamundí, A., Akaarir, M., Canellas, F., Rial, R., & Nicolau, M. C. (2020). Bright Light Therapy and
Circadian Cycles in Institutionalized Elders. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 14.
Rutter, M. (1987). Parental mental disorder as a psychiatric risk factor. In A. Hales & A. Frances (Eds.), American
Psychiatric Association – Annual Review (Vol. 6, pp. 647–663). American Psychiatric Press, Inc.
348
Compilation of References
Rutter, M. (2005). Multiple meanings of a development perspective on psychopathology. European Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 2(3), 221–252. doi:10.1080/17405620500237706
Ryff, C. D., & Singer, B. H. (2008). Know thyself and become what you are: A eudaimonic approach to psychological
well-being. Journal of Happiness Studies, 9(1), 13–39. doi:10.100710902-006-9019-0
Sacks, D., Das, D., Romanick, R., Caron, M., Morano, C., & Fahs, M. C. (2012). The value of daily money management:
An analysis of outcomes and costs. Journal of Evidence-Based Social Work, 9(5), 498–511. doi:10.1080/15433714.20
11.581530 PMID:23092378
Sadowsky, C. H., & Galvin, J. E. (2012). Guidelines for the management of cognitive and behavioral problems in dementia.
Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 25(3), 350–366.
Sá, F., Pinto, P., Cunha, C., Lemos, R., Letra, L., Simões, M., & Santana, I. (2012). Differences between early and lateonset
Alzheimer’s disease in neuropsychological tests. Frontiers in Neurology, 3, 81.
Saftari, L. N., & Kwon, O. S. (2018). Ageing vision and falls: A review. Journal of Physiological Anthropology, 37(1),
1–14.
Sahadevan, S., Chin, J. J., Yap, M. N. M., & Yeoh, O. E. (2003). Assessing decision-making capacity in dementia
patients: A semi structured approach. Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore, 32, 749–755. PMID:14716942
Sakari, R., Era, P., Rantanen, T., Leskinen, E., Laukkanen, P., & Heikkinen, E. (2010). Mobility performance and its
sensory, psychomotor and musculoskeletal determinants from age 75 to age 80. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research,
22(1), 47–53. doi:10.1007/BF03324815 PMID:20305367
Sakuraba, Y., Kumawzawa, Y., & Matsuda, O. (2004). Development of the Financial Competency Assessment Tool
(FCAT): A study of the reliability and validity of the FCAT. Bulettin of Tokyo Gakugei University Section I Science
Education, 55, 131–139.
Salehi, A., Jannati, A., Nosratnjad, S., & Heydari, L. (2018). Factors influencing the inpatients satisfaction in public
hospitals: A systematic review. Bali Medical Journal, 7(1), 17. doi:10.15562/bmj.v7i1.533
Santos-Rocha, R., Francisco, R., Ribeiro, R., & Campos, F. (2023) Importância e benefícios do exercício físico na
população idosa. In F. Campos & E. Ângelo (Eds.) Envelhecimento e Atividade Física - Guia para Profissionais. Lidel.
Sapienza, G., & Pedremônico, M. (2005). Risco, protecção e resiliência no desenvolvimento da criança e do adolescente.
Psicologia em Estudo, 10(2), 209–216. doi:10.1590/S1413-73722005000200007
Sari, R. K., Sutiadiningsih, A., Zaini, H., Meisarah, F., & Hubur, A. A. (2020). Factors affecting cognitive intelligence
theory. Journal of Critical Reviews, 7(17), 402–410.
Schapmire, T. J., Head, B. A., Nash, W. A., Yankeelov, P. A., Furman, C. D., Wright, R. B., & Faul, A. C. (2018). Overcoming
barriers to interprofessional education in gerontology: The interprofessional curriculum for the care of older
adults. Advances in Medical Education and Practice, 9, 109.
Schmidt, M. (1996). Rey auditory verbal learning test: A handbook (Vol. 17). Western Psychological Services Los Angeles.
Schoberer, D., Eglseer, D., Halfens, R. J. G., & Lohrmann, C. (2018). Development and evaluation of brochures for fall
prevention education created to empower nursing home residents and family members. International Journal of Older
People Nursing, 13(2), e12187. doi:10.1111/opn.12187
349
Compilation of References
Schoenberg, M. R., Dawson, K. A., Duff, K., Patton, D., Scott, J. G., & Adams, R. L. (2006). Test performance and
classification statistics for the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in selected clinical samples. Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology, 21(7), 693–703.
Schoeni, R. F., Freedman, V. A., & Martin, L. G. (2008). Why is late-life disability declining? The Milbank Quarterly,
86(1), 47–89. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2007.00513.x PMID:18307477
Schulz, R., & Martire, L. M. (2004). Family caregiving of persons with dementia: Prevalence, health effects, and support
strategies. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12(3), 240–249. doi:10.1097/00019442-200405000-00002
PMID:15126224
Schuurmans, N., Comijs, H. C., Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Winkel, F. W., & van den Berg, J. F. (2019). The effectiveness
of a self-compassion intervention for older adults experiencing depressive symptoms: A randomized controlled trial.
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 34(12), 1841–1851. doi:10.1002/gps.5199
Sciomer, S., Moscucci, F., Maffei, S., Gallina, S., & Mattioli, A. V. (2019). Prevention of cardiovascular risk factors in
women: The lifestyle paradox and stereotypes we need to defeat. European Journal of Preventive Cardiology, 26(6),
609–610.
Seixas, M. B., Almeida, L. B., Trevizan, P. F., Martinez, D. G., Laterza, M. C., Vanderlei, L. C. M., & Silva, L. P. (2020).
Effects of inspiratory muscle training in older adults. Respiratory Care, 65(4), 535–544.
Seligman, M. E. P. (2011). Flourish: A visionary new understanding of happiness and well-being. Free Press.
Semmer, N. K., Elfering, A., Jacobshagen, N., Perrot, T., Beehr, T. A., & Boos, N. (2008). The emotional meaning of
instrumental social support. International Journal of Stress Management, 15(3), 235–251. doi:10.1037/1072-5245.15.3.235
Sengoku, R. (2020). Aging and Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Neuropathology, 40(1), 22–29.
Seo, E. H., Lee, D. Y., Lee, J. H., Choo, I. H., Kim, J. W., Kim, S. G., Park, S. Y., Shin, J. H., Do, Y. J., & Yoon, J. C.
(2010). Total scores of the CERAD neuropsychological assessment battery: Validation for mild cognitive impairment
and dementia patients with diverse etiologies. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18(9), 801–809.
Seppala, L. J., Kamkar, N., van Poelgeest, E. P., Thomsen, K., Daams, J. G., Ryg, J., & van der Velde, N. (2022). Medication
reviews and deprescribing as a single intervention in falls prevention: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Age
and ageing, 51(9), afac191.
Seppala, L. J., Petrovic, M., Ryg, J., Bahat, G., Topinkova, E., Szczerbińska, K., & Van der Velde, N. (2021). STOPPFall
(screening tool of older persons prescriptions in older adults with high fall risk): A Delphi study by the EuGMS task and
finish group on fall-risk-increasing drugs. Age and Ageing, 50(4), 1189–1199.
Serrano, J. P., Latorre, J. M., Gatz, M., & Montorio, I. (2018). Effectiveness of cognitive stimulation therapy for older
adults with depressive symptoms: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 31(4),
173–182. doi:10.1177/0891988718780822
Serviço de Intervenção nos Comportamentos Aditivos e nas Dependências (SICAD) (2018). Relatório Anual - 2018
- A Situação do País em Matéria de Álcool. https://www.sicad.pt/PT/Documents/2019/relatorio_2018/RelatorioAnual_
2018_%20ASituacaoDoPaisEmMateriaDeAlcool.pdf
Serviço Nacional de Saúde (SNS). (2021). Cuidados Continuados. SNS. https://www.sns.gov.pt/sns-saude-mais/
cuidados-continuados/
350
Compilation of References
Serviço Nacional de Saúde (SNS); Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde, IP (ACSS) (2019). Monitorização da
Rede Nacional de Cuidados Integrados (RNCCI). ACSS. https://www.acss.min-saude.pt/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/
Relatorio_-Monitorizacao_RNCCI-2019.pdf
Shahsavari, A., & Bakhshandeh Bavarsad, M. (2020). Is Telenursing an Effective Method to Control BMI and HbA1c
in Illiterate Patients Aged 50 Years and Older With Type 2 Diabetes? A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. Journal
of Caring Sciences, 9(2), 73–79. doi:10.34172/JCS.2020.011 PMID:32626668
Shamsgovara, A., Eklund, P., Winter, M., (2019). A Catalogue of Finite Quantales. GLIOC Notes.
Shamsgovara, A. (2023). Enumerating, Cataloguing and Classifying All Quantales on up to Nine Elements. In R. Glück,
L. Santocanale, & M. Winter (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Vol. 13896. Relational and Algebraic Methods
in Computer Science. RAMiCS 2023. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-28083-2_14
Sharma, P., Sharma, A., Fayaz, F., Wakode, S., & Pottoo, F. H. (2020). Biological Signatures of Alzheimer’s Disease.
Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 20(9), 770–781.
Shaw, L. K., Kiegaldie, D., Jones, C., & Morris, M. E. (2021a). Improving hospital falls screening and mitigation using
a health professional education framework. Nurse Education Today, 98, 104695. doi:10.1016/j.nedt.2020.104695
Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., & Farlie, M. K. (2020). Education interventions for health professionals on falls prevention in
health care settings: A 10-year scoping review. BMC Geriatrics, 90(1), 460. doi:10.118612877-020-01819-x
Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., Heng, H., & Morris, M. E. (2023). Interprofessional education to implement patient falls education
in hospitals: Lessons learned. Nursing Open, 10(1), 36–47. doi:10.1002/nop2.1276
Shaw, L., Kiegaldie, D., & Morris, M. E. (2021b). Educating health professionals to implement evidence-based falls
screening in hospitals. Nurse Education Today, 101, 104874. doi:10.1016/j.nedt.2021.104874
Sheng, X., Tang, J., & Xue, G. (2013). Sensing as a Service: Challenges, Solutions and Future Directions (pp 3733-
3739). IEEE Sensors Journal, 13, 10. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2013.2262677
Sherod, M. G., Griffith, H. R., Copeland, J., Belue, K., Krzywanski, S., Zamrini, E. Y., Harrell, L., Clark, D. G., Brockington,
J. C., Powers, R., & Marson, D. C. (2009). Neurocognitive predictors of financial capacity across the dementia
spectrum: Normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological
Society, 15(2), 258–267. doi:10.1017/S1355617709090365 PMID:19203439
Shivapour, S. K., Nguyen, C. M., Cole, C. A., & Denburg, N. L. (2012). Effects of age, sex, and neuropsychological performance
on financial decision-making. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6, 1–9. doi:10.3389/fnins.2012.00082 PMID:22715322
Silén-Lipponen, M., Turjamaa, R., Tervo-Heikkinen, T., & Äijö, M. (2019). Nursing students learning to prevent falls
of older people through simulations. EAPRIL 2018 Conference Proceedings, Portorož, Slovenia. https://www.eapril.
org/sites/default/files/2019-03/Proceedings%202018%20publication.pdf
Simard, M. (1998). The Mini-Mental State Examination: Strengths and weaknesses of a clinical instrument. The Canadian
Alzheimer Disease Review, 12, 10–12.
Simões. (2006). A nova velhice. Um novo público a educar. Âmbar.
Singam, N. S. V., Fine, C., & Fleg, J. L. (2020). Cardiac changes associated with vascular aging. Clinical Cardiology,
43(2), 92–98.
Singh, A., Rehman, S., Yongchareon, S., & Chong, P. (2020). Sensor Technologies for Fall Detection Systems: A Review.
IEEE Sensors Journal, 20(13).
351
Compilation of References
Siqueira, M. M. M. (2008). Construção e validação da escala de percepção de suporte social. Psicologia em Estudo,
13(2), 381–388. doi:10.1590/S1413-73722008000200021
Skinner, M. W., Andrews, G. J., & Cutchin, M. P. (Eds.). (2017). Geographical gerontology: Perspectives, concepts,
approaches. Routledge.
Skok, A., Harvey, D., & Reddihough, D. (2006). Perceived stress, perceived social support, and wellbeing among
mothers of school-aged children with cerebral palsy. Journal of Intellectual & Developmental Disability, 31(1), 53–57.
doi:10.1080/13668250600561929 PMID:16766323
Slovenko, R. (2006). Civil competency. In I. B. Weiner & A. K. Hess (Eds.), The Handbook of Forensic Psychology
(pp. 190–209). John Wiley.
Smith, T. B., McCullough, M. E., & Poll, J. (2003). Religiousness and Depression: Evidence for a Main Effect and the
Moderating Influence of Stressful Life Events. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4), 614–636. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.4.614
PMID:12848223
Sociedade Portuguesa de Diabetologia. (2019). Diabetes: Factos e Números - O Ano de 2016, 2017 e 2018 - Relatório
Anual do Observatório Nacional da Diabetes. Sociedade Portuguesa de Diabetologia. https://www.spd.pt/images/uploads/
20210304-200808/DF&N-2019_Final.pdf
Souca, M. L. (2011). SERVQUAL-Thirty years of research on service quality with implications for customer satisfaction.
International Conference “Marketing from Information to Decision” 4th Edition, 420–429. Research Gate. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/346470601
Sousa, L. B., Simoes, M. R., Firmino, H., & Peisah, C. (2014). Financial and testamentary capacity evaluations: Procedures
and assessment instruments underneath a functional approach. International Psychogeriatrics, 26(2), 217–228.
doi:10.1017/S1041610213001828 PMID:24229806
Sousa, L., & Rodrigues, S. (2009). Linking formal and informal support in multiproblem low-income families: The role
of the family manager. Journal of Community Psychology, 37(5), 649–662. doi:10.1002/jcop.20313
Spreng, R. N., Cassidy, B. N., Darboh, B. S., DuPre, E., Lockrow, A. W., Setton, R., & Turner, G. R. (2017). Financial
exploitation is associated with structural and functional brain differences in healthy older adults. Journals of Gerontology
Series A: Biomedical Sciences and Medical Sciences, 72(10), 1365–1368. doi:10.1093/gerona/glx051 PMID:28369260
Stambler, I. (2017). Recognizing degenerative aging as a treatable medical condition: Methodology and policy. Aging
and Disease, 8(5), 583.
Stamovlasis, D., Giannouli, V., Vaiopoulou, J., & Tsolaki, M. (2022). Catastrophe theory applied to neuropsychological
data: Nonlinear effects of depression on financial capacity in amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia.
Entropy (Basel, Switzerland), 24(8), 1089. doi:10.3390/e24081089 PMID:36010753
State Statistical Office of Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022b) Mortality in the Republic of North Macedonia.
Year LX SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/pdf/2022/2.1.22.24_mk.pdf
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2002a) Census of Population, Households
and Dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia, 2002 – Book XIII. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/pdf/kniga_13.pdf
State Statistical office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022c) Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of
North Macedonia. SSORNM. www.stat.gov.mk
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022d, June 1st) Marriages and divorces in the
Republic of North Macedonia in 2021. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/pdf/2022/2.1.22.19_mk.pdf
352
Compilation of References
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022e). Natality in the Republic of North
Macedonia, 2021. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/pdf/2022/2.1.22.23_mk.pdf
State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia (SSORNM). (2022f) Census 2021 / Вкупно резидентно
население, домаќинства и станови во Република Северна Македонија, попис 2021, уредник Татјана Ѓорѓиевска.
Скопје. SSORNM. https://www.stat.gov.mk/InfoGraphic/2022/POPIS_DZS_web_MK.pdf
Steele, E., Wood, D. S., Usadi, E. J., Applegarth, D. M., & Usadi, J. (2018). TRR’s Warrior Camp: An Intensive Treatment
Program for Combat Trauma in Active Military and Veterans of All Eras. Military Medicine, 183(suppl_1), 403–407.
doi:10.1093/milmed/usx153 PMID:29635563
Stoeckel, L. E., Stewart, C. C., Griffith, H. R., Triebel, K., Okonkwo, O. C., Den Hollander, J. A., Martin, R. C., Belue,
K., Copeland, J. N., Harrell, L. E., Brockington, J. C., Clark, D. G., & Marson, D. C. (2013). MRI volume of the medial
frontal cortex predicts financial capacity in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Imaging and Behavior, 7(3),
282–292. doi:10.100711682-013-9226-3 PMID:23504597
Stratford, P. W., Kennedy, D. M., & Robarts, S. F. (2010). Modelling knee range of motion post arthroplasty: Clinical applications.
Physiotherapy Canada. Physiotherapie Canada, 62(4), 378–387. doi:10.3138/physio.62.4.378 PMID:21886379
Streisand, A. F., & Spar, J. E. (2008). A lawyer’s guide to diminishing capacity and effective use of medical experts in
contemporaneous and retrospective evaluations. ACTEC Journal, 33, 180–194.
Stuck, A. E., Siu, A. L., Wieland, G. D., Adams, J., & Rubenstein, L. Z. (1993). Comprehensive geriatric assessment: A
meta-analysis of controlled trials. Lancet, 342(8878), 1032–1036. doi:10.1016/0140-6736(93)92884-V PMID:8105269
Stucki, G., Reinhardt, J. D., Grimby, G., & Melvin, J. (2008). Developing research capacity in human functioning and
rehabilitation research from the comprehensive perspective based on the ICF-model. European Journal of Physical and
Rehabilitation Medicine, 44(3), 343–351. PMID:18762743
Studenski, S. (2003). Mobility. In W. R. Hazzard, J. P. Blass, & J. B. Halter (Eds.), Principles of Geriatric Medicine and
Gerontology (5th ed., pp. 947–960). McGraw-Hill.
Studenski, S., Perera, S., Patel, K., Rosano, C., Faulkner, K., Inzitari, M., Brach, J., Chandler, J., Cawthon, P., Connor,
E. B., Nevitt, M., Visser, M., Kritchevsky, S., Badinelli, S., Harris, T., Newman, A. B., Cauley, J., Ferrucci, L., & Guralnik,
J. (2011). Gait speed and survival in older adults. Journal of the American Medical Association, 305(1), 50–58.
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1923 PMID:21205966
Studenski, S., Perera, S., Wallace, D., Chandler, J. M., Duncan, P. W., Rooney, E., Fox, M., & Guralnik, J. M. (2003).
Physical performance measures in the clinical setting. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 51(3), 314–322.
doi:10.1046/j.1532-5415.2003.51104.x PMID:12588574
Sullivan, M., Tanzer, M., Stanish, W., Fallaha, M., Keefe, F. J., Simmonds, M., & Dunbar, M. (2009). Psychological
determinants of problematic outcomes following Total Knee Arthroplasty. Pain, 143(1-2), 123–129. doi:10.1016/j.
pain.2009.02.011 PMID:19304392
Sumi, L., Longchar, I., & Dey, S. (2019). IoT-based Fall Prevention and Detection for Senior Citizens, Phisically and
Intellectually Disabled (pp 190-195). 2019 International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT). IEEE. 10.1109/
ICIT48102.2019.00040
Sunderland, A., Walker, C. M., & Walker, M. F. (2006). Action errors and dressing disability after stroke: An ecological
approach to neuropsychological assessment and intervention. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 16(6), 666–683.
doi:10.1080/09602010500204385 PMID:17127572
353
Compilation of References
Sung, Y.-H., Kim, C.-J., Yu, B.-K., & Kim, K.-M. (2013). A hippotherapy simulator is effective to shift weight bearing
toward the affected side during gait in patients with stroke. NeuroRehabilitation, 33(3), 407–412. doi:10.3233/NRE-
130971 PMID:23949070
Swain, G. R. (n.d.). How does socioeconomic disadvantage drive poor health outcomes? 33(1), 2016–2033. www.
countyhealthrankings.org/our-
Swainson, R., Hodges, J. R., Galton, C. J., Semple, J., Michael, A., Dunn, B. D., Iddon, J. L., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian,
B. J. (2001). Early detection and differential diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and depression with neuropsychological
tasks. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 12(4), 265–280.
Swavely, D., Vorderstrasse, A., Maldonado, E., Eid, S., & Etchason, J. (2014). Implementation and evaluation of a low
health literacy and culturally sensitive diabetes education program. Journal for Healthcare Quality : Official Publication
of the National Association for Healthcare Quality, 36(6), 16–23. doi:10.1111/jhq.12021 PMID:23799918
Tahami Monfared, A. A., Byrnes, M. J., White, L. A., & Zhang, Q. (2022). The Humanistic and Economic Burden of
Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurology and Therapy, 1–27.
Takeda, N., Terada, S., Sato, S., Honda, H., Yoshida, H., Kishimoto, Y., Kamata, G., Oshima, E., Ishihara, T., & Kuroda,
S. (2010). Wisconsin card sorting test and brain perfusion imaging in early dementia. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 29(1), 21–27.
Tallberg, I.-M. (2005). The Boston naming test in Swedish: Normative data. Brain and Language, 94(1), 19–31.
Tan, J. A., & Wong, F. C. (2019). An exploration of the effects of a reminiscence group on well-being among elderly
residents in a nursing home. Asian Journal of Gerontology & Geriatrics, 14(1), 14–20. doi:10.3126/ajgg.v14i1.23231
Taramasco, C., Rodenas, T., Martinez, F., Fuentes, P., Munoz, R., Olivares, R., Albuquerque, V., & Demongeot, J. (2018).
A Novel Monitoring System for Fall Detection in Older People (pp 43563-43574). IEEE Access: Practical Innovations,
Open Solutions, 6, doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2861331
Taylor, D., McCaffrey, R., Reinoso, H., Mathis, M. W., Dickerson, L., & Hamrick, J. (2019). An interprofessional education
approach to fall prevention: Preparing members of the interprofessional healthcare team to implement STEADI into
practice. Gerontology & Geriatrics Education, 40(1), 105–120. doi:10.1080/02701960.2018.1530226
Taylor, N. (2015). A patient education program supported by staff training can reduce the rate of falls for older patients
during inpatient rehabilitation [synopsis]. Journal of Physiotherapy, 61(4), 224. doi:10.1016/j.jphys.2015.07.016
Thambiah, M. D., Nathan, S., Seow, B. Z., Liang, S., & Lingaraj, K. (2015). Patient satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty:
An Asian perspective. Singapore Medical Journal, 56(5), 259–263. doi:10.11622medj.2015074 PMID:26034317
The Ethnic Communities’ Council of Victoria (ECCV). (2015) Dignity and ageing in a new culture: Mutual trust and
respect with family, friends and relatives. A Macedonian community education resource kit for elder abuse prevention.
ECCV. https://eccv.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/resource-eLEDER-aBUSE-Macedonian_Community_Education_
Kit_on_Elder_Abuse.pdf
The Finnish Association of Physiotherapists. (2017). Kaatumisten ja kaatumisvammojen ehkäisyn fysioterapiasuositus.
Terveys Portti. https://www.terveysportti.fi/dtk/sfs/avaa?p_artikkeli=sfs00003
The Prevention of Falls Network for Dissemination (ProFouND). (2015). Resources. Profound. https://profound.eu.com/
category/resources/
TheGlobalEconomy.com. (2022) North Macedonia: Human Flight and brain drain. Global Economy. https://www.
theglobaleconomy.com/Macedonia/human_flight_brain_drain_index/
354
Compilation of References
Thoits, P. A. (1982). Life stress, social support, and psychological vulnerability: Epidemiological considerations. Journal of
Community Psychology, 10(4), 341–362. doi:10.1002/1520-6629(198210)10:4<341::AID-JCOP2290100406>3.0.CO;2-J
PMID:10298894
Thompson, T., Futterman, A., Gallagher-Thompson, D., Rose, J., Lovett, S., & Reiser, R. (2019). Telephone-based
reminiscence therapy for rural dwelling individuals with dementia and their family caregivers: A pilot study. Journal of
Gerontological Social Work, 62(6), 615–628. doi:10.1080/01634372.2019.1580316
Thonnard, J. L., & Penta, M. (2007). Functional assessment in physiotherapy. A literature review. Europa Medicophysica,
43(4), 525–541. PMID:18084177
Tiedemann, A., Sturnieks, D.L., Hill, A.M., Lovitt, L., Clemson, L., & Lord, S.R. (2021). Impact of a fall prevention
education program for health and exercise professionals: a randomised controlled trial. Public Health Research & Practice,
31(3), 30342013. doi:10.17061/phrp30342013.
Tieland, M., Trouwborst, I., & Clark, B. C. (2018). Skeletal muscle performance and ageing. Journal of Cachexia,
Sarcopenia and Muscle, 9(1), 3–19.
Tierney, M. C., Nores, A., Snow, W. G., Fisher, R. H., Zorzitto, M. L., & Reid, D. W. (1994). Use of the Rey Auditory
Verbal Learning Test in differentiating normal aging from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s dementia. Psychological Assessment,
6(2), 129.
Tinios, P., Valvis, Z., & Georgiadis, T. (2022). Heterogeneity in Long-Term Care for Older Adults in Europe: Between
Individual and Systemic Effects. J. Ageing Longev., 2022(2), 153–177. doi:10.3390/jal2020014
To, K. W., Lee, I. F.-K., Choi, K. C., Cheung, Y. T. Y., & Yu, D. S.-F. (2020). An information-motivation-behaviouralbased
model and adherence to inhalation therapy and other health outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: A pilot randomized controlled trial. International Journal of Nursing Practice, 26(2), e12799. doi:10.1111/
ijn.12799 PMID:31903654
Tolbert, S., Liu, Y., Hellegers, C., Petrella, J. R., Weiner, M. W., Wong, T. Z., & Murali Doraiswamy, P. (2019). Financial
management skills in aging, MCI and dementia: Cross sectional relationship to 18F-Florbetapir PET cortical β-amyloid
deposition. The Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease, 6(4), 274–282. doi:10.14283/jpad.2019.26 PMID:31686100
Toots, A., Wiklund, R., Littbrand, H., Nordin, E., Nordström, P., Lundin-Olsson, L., & Rosendahl, https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/neup.12626E. (2019). The effects of exercise on falls in older people with dementia living in
nursing homes: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 20(7), 835-842.
Topooco, N., Riper, H., Araya, R., Berking, M., Brunn, M., Chevreul, K., Cieslak, R., & Clougherty, K. F. (2017). Attitudes
towards digital treatment for depression: A European stakeholder survey. Internet Interventions: the Application
of Information Technology in Mental and Behavioural Health, 8, 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.invent.2017.01.001 PMID:30135823
Torkshavand, G., Khatiban, M., & Soltanian, A. R. (2020). Simulation-based learning to enhance students’ knowledge
and skills in educating older patients. Nurse Education in Practice, 42, 102678. doi:10.1016/j.nepr.2019.102678
Tornero-Quiñones, I., Sáez-Padilla, J., Espina Díaz, A., Abad Robles, M. T., & Sierra Robles, Á. (2020). Functional
ability, frailty and risk of falls in the elderly: Relations with autonomy in daily living. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 17(3), 1006.
Tracy, V. L., Basso, M. R., Marson, D. C., Combs, D. R., & Whiteside, D. M. (2017). Capacity for financial decision
making in multiple sclerosis. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 39(1), 46–57. doi:10.1080/138
03395.2016.1201050 PMID:27430343
355
Compilation of References
Triebel, K. L., Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Marceaux, J., Okonkwo, O. C., Harrell, L., Clark, D., Brockington, J., Bartolucci,
A., & Marson, D. C. (2009). Declining financial capacity in mild cognitive impairment: A 1-year longitudinal
study. Neurology, 73(12), 928–934. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b87971 PMID:19770468
Triebel, K. L., Okonkwo, O. C., Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Crowther, M., & Marson, D. C. (2010). Financial capacity
of older African Americans with amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders,
24(4), 365–371. doi:10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181e7cb05 PMID:20625268
Tubach, F., Ravaud, P., Baron, G., Falissard, B., Logeart, I., Bellamy, N., Bombardier, C., Felson, D., Hochberg, M., van
der Heijde, D., & Dougados, M. (2005). Evaluation of clinically relevant changes in patient reported outcomes in knee
and hip osteoarthritis: The minimal clinically important improvement. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 64(1), 29–33.
doi:10.1136/ard.2004.022905 PMID:15208174
Turismo de Portugal. (2022). Sobre Portugal. Turismo de Portugal. https://www.visitportugal.com/pt-pt/sobre-portugal/
biportugal
Turismo de Portugal. (2022a). Património Mundial. Turismo de Portugal. https://www.visitportugal.com/pt-pt/sobreportugal/
biportugal
Turjamaa, R., Äijö, M., Tervo-Heikkinen, T., & Silèn-Lipponen, M. (2020). A Qualitative Study of Nursing Students’
Experiences in Fall Prevention for Older Home Care Clients. Journal of Aging. doi:10.1155/2020/7652623
Ulbl, J., & Rakusa, M. (2021). The Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale–Cognitive Subscale (ADAS‐Cog): Validation
of Slovenian version for detecting mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia,
17, e056177.
UNESCO. (2022). Natural and Cultural Heritage of the Ohrid region. WHC. https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/99/
Ungvari, Z., Tarantini, S., Donato, A. J., Galvan, V., & Csiszar, A. (2018). Mechanisms of vascular aging. Circulation
Research, 123(7), 849–867.
United Nations (UN). (2022). International migrant stock 2020. UN. https://www.un.org/development/desa/pd/content/
international-migrant-stock
United Nations Economic Commision for Europe. (2013). Abuse of Older Persons. UNECE Policy Brief on Ageing, (14), 24.
United States Bone and Joint Initiative. (2014). The Burden of Musculoskeletal Diseases in the United States (BMUS).
3rd ed. Rosemont. http://www.boneandjointburden.org.
Valsaraj, B. P., Bhat, S. M., Prabhu, R., & Kamath, A. (2021). Follow-Up Study on the Effect of Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy on Haemodialysis Adherence: A randomised controlled trial. Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal, 21(1),
e58–e65. doi:10.18295qumj.2021.21.01.008 PMID:33777424
Valtorta, N.K., Kanaan, M., Gilbody, S., Ronzi, S. & Hanratty, B. (2016). Loneliness and social isolation as risk factors
for coronary heart disease and stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal observational studies. Heart,
102(13), 1009-16. doi:. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2015-308790
van den Anker, J., Reed, M. D., Allegaert, K., & Kearns, G. L. (2018). Developmental changes in pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 58, S10–S25.
van den Berg, E., Poos, J. M., Jiskoot, L. C., Heijnen, L. M., Franzen, S., Steketee, R. M. E., Meijboom, R., De Jong,
F. J., Seelaar, H., & Van Swieten, J. (2020). Differences in discriminability and response bias on Rey Auditory Verbal
Learning Test Delayed Recognition in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of
the International Neuropsychological Society, 26(9), 918–926.
356
Compilation of References
van der Velde, N., Seppala, L., Petrovic, M., Ryg, J., Tan, M. P., Montero-Odasso, M., & Masud, T. (2022). Sustainable fall
prevention across Europe: Challenges and opportunities. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research, 34(10), 2553–2556.
van Onna, M., & Boonen, A. (2016). The challenging interplay between rheumatoid arthritis, ageing and comorbidities.
BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 17(1), 184.
Van Wielingen, L. E., Tuokko, H. A., Cramer, K., Mateer, C. A., & Hultsch, D. F. (2004). Awareness of financial skills
in dementia. Aging & Mental Health, 8(4), 374–380. doi:10.1080/13607860410001709728 PMID:15370053
Vandeweerd, C., Paveza, G. J., & Fulmer, T. (2006). Abuse and neglect in older adults with Alzheimer’s disease. The
Nursing Clinics of North America, 41(1), 43–55. doi:10.1016/j.cnur.2005.09.004 PMID:16492453
Verbrugge, L. M., & Jette, A. M. (1994). The disablement process. Social science & medicine (1982), 38(1), 1–14.
doi:10.1016/0277-9536(94)90294-1
Verma, N., Beretvas, S. N., Pascual, B., Masdeu, J. C., & Markey, M. K. (2015). New scoring methodology improves the
sensitivity of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) in clinical trials. Alzheimer’s
Research & Therapy, 7(1), 1–17.
Veronese, N., Stubbs, B., Noale, M., Solmi, M., Pilotto, A., Vaona, A., & Maggi, S. (2017). Polypharmacy is associated
with higher frailty risk in older people: An 8-year longitudinal cohort study. Journal of the American Medical Directors
Association, 18(7), 624–628.
Verwey, R., van der Weegen, S., Spreeuwenberg, M., Tange, H., van der Weijden, T., & de Witte, L. (2016). Process
evaluation of physical activity counselling with and without the use of mobile technology: A mixed methods study.
International Journal of Nursing Studies, 53, 3–16. doi:10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2015.10.008 PMID:26518108
Viccaro, L. J., Perera, S., & Studenski, S. A. (2011). Is timed up and go better than gait speed in predicting health,
function, and falls in older adults? Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 59(5), 887–892. doi:10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2011.03336.x PMID:21410448
Vieira, E. R., Palmer, R. C., & Chaves, P. H. (2016). Prevention of falls in older people living in the community. British
Medical Journal, 53, 1–13.
Wadley, V. G., Harrell, L. E., & Marson, D. C. (2003). Self- and informant report of financial abilities in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease: Reliable and valid? Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 51(11), 1621–1626. doi:10.1046/
j.1532-5415.2003.51514.x PMID:14687393
Walker, L. C., Clement, N. D., Bardgett, M., Weir, D., Holland, J., Gerrand, C., & Deehan, D. J. (2018). The WOMAC
score can be reliably used to classify patient satisfaction after total knee arthroplasty. Knee surgery, sports traumatology,
arthroscopy: official journal of the ESSKA, 26(11), 3333–3341. doi:10.1007/s00167-018-4879-5
Walker, C. M., Sunderland, A., Sharma, J., & Walker, M. F. (2004). The impact of cognitive impairment on upper body
dressing difficulties after stroke: A video analysis of patterns of recovery. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and
Psychiatry, 75(1), 43–48. PMID:14707306
Walker, M. F., Sunderland, A., Fletcher-Smith, J., Drummond, A., Logan, P., Edmans, J. A., Garvey, K., Dineen, R.
A., Ince, P., Horne, J., Fisher, R. J., & Taylor, J. L. (2012). The DRESS trial: A feasibility randomized controlled trial
of a neuropsychological approach to dressing therapy for stroke inpatients. Clinical Rehabilitation, 26(8), 675–685.
doi:10.1177/0269215511431089 PMID:22180445
Wang, D., Shen, J., Mei, L., Qian, S., Li, J., & Hao, Z. (2017). Performance Investigation of a Weareable Distributed-
Deflection Sensor in Arterial Pulse Waveform Measurement. IEEE Sensor Journal, 17(13).
357
Compilation of References
Wang, S., & Zhang, X. (2015). An Approach for Fall Detection of Older Population Based on Multi-sensor Data Fusion
(pp 320-323). The 12th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots and Ambient Intelligente (URAI 2015), Goyang
City, Korea.
Wang, Y., Cang, S., & Yu, H. (2017). A noncontact-sensor surveillance system towards assisting independent living for
older people. Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Automation & Computing, University of Huddersfield,
UK. 10.23919/IConAC.2017.8082002
Wang, Y., Cang, S., & Yu, H. (2018). A Data Fusion-Based Hybrid Sensory System for Older People’s Daily Activity
and Daily Routine Recognition. IEEE Sensors Journal, 18(16).
Wang, W., Wang, Q., & Sohraby, K. (2017). Multimedia Sensing as a Service (MSaaS): Exploring Resource Saving
Potentials of a Cloud-Edge IoT and Fogs (pp 487-495). IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4, 2.
Wang, X., & Li, L. (2018). A randomized controlled trial of reminiscence therapy on depression and apathy in elderly
nursing home residents. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 8(8), 28–34. doi:10.5430/jnep.v8n8p28
Wang, X., & Zheng, Y. (2019). The effectiveness of reminiscence therapy on the improvement of elderly depression: A
meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research, 272, 181–191. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.114
Wang, Y., Huang, H., & Chen, G. (2020). Effects of lighting on ECG, visual performance and psychology of the elderly.
Optik (Stuttgart), 203, 164063.
Ward, M., May, P., Normand, C., Kenny, R.A. & Nolan, A. (2021a). Mortality risk associated with combinations of
loneliness and social isolation. Findings from The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA). Age Ageing, 50(4),
1329-1335. doi:. doi:10.1093/ageing/afab004
Ward, M., O’Mahoney, P., & Kenny, R. A. (2021b). Altered lives in a time of crisis: The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on the lives of older adults in Ireland. Findings from The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing. https://www.doi.
org/10.38018/TildaRe.2021-01
Watiki, C. (2014). Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction in Hotels in Nairobi. University of Nairobi. http://erepository.
uonbi.ac.ke/handle/11295/75971
Watson, N. L., Rosano, C., Boudreau, R. M., Simonsick, E. M., Ferrucci, L., Sutton-Tyrrell, K., Hardy, S. E., Atkinson,
H. H., Yaffe, K., Satterfield, S., Harris, T. B., Newman, A. B., & Health, A. B. C. (2010). Executive function, memory,
and gait speed decline in well-functioning older adults. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and
Medical Sciences, 65(10), 1093–1100. doi:10.1093/gerona/glq111 PMID:20581339
Webster, J. D. (2003). An exploratory analysis of a self-assessed wisdom scale. Journal of Adult Development, 10(1),
13–22. doi:10.1023/A:1020782619051
Wei, M., Shi, J., Li, T., Ni, J., Zhang, X., Li, Y., Kang, S., Ma, F., Xie, H., & Qin, B. (2018). Diagnostic accuracy of
the Chinese version of the trail‐making test for screening cognitive impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 66(1), 92–99.
Weissberger, G. H., Samek, A., Mosqueda, L., Nguyen, A. L., Lim, A. C., Fenton, L., & Han, S. D. (2022). Increased
financial altruism is associated with Alzheimer’s Disease neurocognitive profile in older adults. Journal of Alzheimer’s
Disease, 88(3), 995–1005. doi:10.3233/JAD-220187 PMID:35723104
Weiss, C. O., Fried, L. P., & Bandeen-Roche, K. (2007). Exploring the hierarchy of mobility performance in highfunctioning
older women. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 62(2),
167–173. doi:10.1093/gerona/62.2.167 PMID:17339641
358
Compilation of References
Welsh, T. J., Gordon, A. L., & Gladman, J. R. (2014). Comprehensive geriatric assessment—a guide for the non-specialist.
International Journal of Clinical Practice, 68(3), 290–293. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijcp.12313
White-Lewis, S., Johnson, R., Ye, S., & Russell, C. (2019). An equine-assisted therapy intervention to improve pain,
range of motion, and quality of life in adults and older adults with arthritis: A randomized controlled trial. Applied Nursing
Research, 49, 5–12. doi:10.1016/j.apnr.2019.07.002 PMID:31495419
WHO. (1980). International Classification of Impairment, Disabilities and Handicaps: a manual of classification relating
the consequences of disease. World Health Organization.
WHO. (2001). The International Classification Functioning, Disability and Health. World Health Organization.
WHO. (2015). Relatório Mundial de Envelhecimento e Saúde. Geneva. World Health Organization https://www.who.
int/publications/i/item/9789241565042
WHO. (2015). World report on ageing and health. WHO.
WHO. (2017). Integrated Care for older people. Guidelines on community-level interventions to manage declines in
intrinsic capacity. WHO. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/258981
WHO. (2022a). Ageing and Health. Key Facts. WHO. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ageing-and-health
WHO. (2022b). Ageing. Impact. WHO. https://www.who.int/health-topics/ageing#tab=tab_1
WHO. (2022c). Ageing. Overview. WHO. https://www.who.int/health-topics/ageing#tab=tab_1
Widera, E., Steenpass, V., Marson, D., & Sudore, R. (2011). Finances in the older patient with cognitive impairment: “He
didn’t want me to take over”. Journal of the American Medical Association, 305(7), 698–706. doi:10.1001/jama.2011.164
PMID:21325186
Wilber, K. H., & McNeilly, D. P. (2001). Elder abuse and victimization. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook
of the psychology of aging (pp. 569–591). Academic Press.
Wilkie, R., Peat, G., Thomas, E., & Croft, P. (2007). Factors associated with participation restriction in communitydwelling
adults aged 50 years and over. Quality of Life Research: An International Journal of Quality of Life Aspects of
Treatment, Care and Rehabilitation, 16(7), 1147–1156. doi:10.100711136-007-9221-5 PMID:17530446
Wilson, B. A., & Betteridge, S. (2019). Essentials of neuropsychological rehabilitation. Guilford Publications.
Winblad, B., Amouyel, P., Andrieu, S., Ballard, C., Brayne, C., Brodaty, H., Cedazo-Minguez, A., Dubois, B., Edvardsson,
D., & Feldman, H. (2016). Defeating Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias: A priority for European science and
society. Lancet Neurology, 15(5), 455–532.
Woldeyohanes, T. R., Woldehaimanot, T. E., Kerie, M. W., Mengistie, M. A., & Yesuf, E. A. (2015). Perceived patient
satisfaction with in-patient services at Jimma University Specialized Hospital, Southwest Ethiopia Public Health. BMC
Research Notes, 8(1), 1–8. doi:10.118613104-015-1179-8
Wolffsohn, J. S., & Davies, L. N. (2019). Presbyopia: Effectiveness of correction strategies. Progress in Retinal and Eye
Research, 68, 124–143.
Wood, S. (2007). The role of neuropsychological assessment in capacity evaluations. In S. H. Qualls & M. A. Smyer
(Eds.), Changes in decision-making capacity in older adults: Assessment and intervention (pp. 191–204). John Wiley.
359
Compilation of References
Wood, S., Bally, K., Cabane, C., Fassbind, P., Jox, R. J., Leyhe, T., Monsch, A., & Trachsel, M. (2020). Decision-making
capacity evaluations: The role of neuropsychological assessment from a multidisciplinary perspective. BMC Geriatrics,
20(1), 535. doi:10.118612877-020-01932-x PMID:33302888
Woo, Y. S., Shin, G. I., & Park, H. Y. (2020). Comparative Analysis of Differences in Reaction Time and Divided Attention
with Elderly Age: Using the Driving Ability Assessment Tool. Therapeutic Science for Rehabilitation, 9(3), 53–61.
World Bank. (2020). Human Capital Project. Word Bank. www.worldbank.org/humancapital
World Health Organization (WHO). (2010). Framework for Action on Interprofessional Education and Collaborative
Practice. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). World report on ageing and health. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019a). Environmental health inequalities in Europe. Second assessment report.
WHO: Regional Office for Europe. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/9789289054157
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019b). World Health Statistics. Overview. Monitoring Health. WHO: Regional
Office for Europe. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/9789289054157
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021). Older people and access to health care in North Macedonia Available at:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/339644/9789289055420-eng.pdf
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021). Step safely: strategies for preventing and manageingAGEING falls across
the life-course. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2022d). Core health indicators in the WHO European Region: special focus:
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. WHO. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/WHO-EURO-
2020-1887-41638-56893
World Health Organization (WHO). (2022e). WHO European Regional Obesity Report 2022. WHO.
World Health Organization. (1986). Carta de Ottawa. Primeira Conferência Internacional sobre Promoção da Saúde.
WHO. https://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/carta_ottawa.pdf
World Health Organization. (1997). WHOQOL: Measuring quality of life, 13. Genéve. WHO. https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/63482
World Health Organization. (1999). A life course perspective of maintaining independence in older age. Genéve. WHO.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/65576
World Health Organization. (2002). Active ageing: a policy framework. Genéve. WHO. https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/67215
World Health Organization. (2002). Active aging: A police framework. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization. (2003). Adherence to long-term therapies : evidence for action. World Health Organization.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42682
World Health Organization. (2011). European report on preventing elder maltreatment. Geneva. WHO. https://www.
euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/144676/e95110.pdf
World Health Organization. (2012). Good health adds life to years: Global brief for World Health Day 2012. WHO.
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-DCO-WHD-2012.2
360
Compilation of References
World Health Organization. (2014). Global status report on violence prevention 2014. WHO. https://www.who.int/
publications/i/item/9789241564793
World Health Organization. (2015). World Report on Ageing and Health. WHO. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/
10665/186463
World Health Organization. (2021). Dementia. WHO. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia
World Health Organization. (2022a). Abuse of older people. Violence Prevention Information System (Violence Info).
WHO. https://apps.who.int/violence-info/abuse-of-older-people
World Health Organization. (2022b). Abuse of older people. Fact Sheets. WHO. https://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs357/en/
World Health Organization. (2022c). Tackling abuse of older people. Five priorities for the United Nations Decade of
Healthy Ageing [2021-2030]. Decade of healthy ageing. WHO. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240052550
World Health Organization. Regional Office for Europe; European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies; Simões,
J. A.; Augusto, G. F.; Fronteira, I. & Hernandéz-Quevedo, C. ( 2017) . Portugal: health system review. World Health
Organization. Regional Office for Europe. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/330211
Wrisley, D. M., & Kumar, N. A. (2010). Functional gait assessment: Concurrent, discriminative, and predictive validity
in community-dwelling older adults. Physical Therapy, 90(5), 761–773. doi:10.2522/ptj.20090069 PMID:20360052
Wu, L. F., Lin, Y. S., & Chen, S. C. (2016). A reminiscence program intervention to improve psychological well-being
of institutionalized elderly. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 66, 143–149. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2016.04.011
Wu, Q., Amporfro, D. A., Boah, M., Yingqi, S., Wabo, T. M. C., Zhao, M., & Nkondjock, V. R. N. (2021). Patients
satisfaction with healthcare delivery in Ghana. BMC Health Services Research, 21.
Xesfingi, S., & Vozikis, A. (2016). Patient satisfaction with the healthcare system: Assessing the impact of socioeconomic
and healthcare provision factors. BMC Health Services Research, 16(1), 94. doi:10.118612913-016-1327-4
PMID:26979458
Xu, G., Li, J., Wang, L., Wu, J., Luo, K., Yue, Y., & Ran, F. (2013). Hardware Design of a Body Sensor Network System
used for Elder Care (pp 1585-1589). 2013 Ninth International Conference on Natural Computation (ICNC). IEEE.
10.1109/ICNC.2013.6818234
Xu, Y., & Mao, S. (2013). A Survey of Mobile Cloud Computing for Rich Media Applications (pp 46-53). IEEE Wireless
Communications, 20.
Yaffe, K., Petersen, R. C., Lindquist, K., Kramer, J., & Miller, B. (2006). Subtype of mild cognitive impairment and
progression to dementia and death. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 22(4), 312–319.
Yap, P. L.-K., Ng, T.-P., Niti, M., Yeo, D., & Henderson, L. (2007). Diagnostic performance of Clock Drawing Test by
CLOX in an Asian Chinese population. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 24(3), 193–200.
Yassuda, M. S., Flaks, M. K., Viola, L. F., Pereira, F. S., Memória, C. M., Nunes, P. V., & Forlenza, O. V. (2010).
Psychometric characteristics of the Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test (RBMT) as an early detection instrument for
dementia and mild cognitive impairment in Brazil. International Psychogeriatrics, 22(6), 1003–1011.
Yaya, S., Bishwajit, G., Ekholuenetale, M., Shah, V., Kadio, B., & Udenigwe, O. (2017). Urban-rural difference in
satisfaction with primary healthcare services in Ghana. BMC Health Services Research, 17(1), 776. doi:10.118612913-
017-2745-7 PMID:29178876
361
Compilation of References
Yeh, Y. C., & Wang, Y. C. (2017). The effects of reminiscence therapy on psychological well-being, depression, and
loneliness among the institutionalized aged. International Journal of Gerontology, 11(2), 100–104. doi:10.1016/j.
ijge.2016.07.006
Yeilada, F., & Direktör, E. (2010). Health care service quality: A comparison of public and private hospitals. African
Journal of Business Management, 4(6), 962–971. http://www.academicjournals.org/AJBM
Ye, P., Er, Y., Wang, H., Fang, L., Li, B., & Ivers, R. (2021). Burden of falls among people aged 60 years and older in
mainland China, 1990-2019: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. The Lancet. Public Health, 6,
e907–e918.
Yunes, M. (2003). Psicologia Positiva e Resiliência: O foco no indivíduo e na família. Psicologia em Estudo, 8(spe),
75–84. doi:10.1590/S1413-73722003000300010
Zalonis, I., Kararizou, E., Triantafyllou, N. I., Kapaki, E., Papageorgiou, S., Sgouropoulos, P., & Vassilopoulos, D. (2008).
A normative study of the trail making test A and B in Greek adults. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 22(5), 842–850.
Zelada, M. A., Salinas, R., & Baztán, J. J. (2009). Reduction of functional deterioration during hospitalization in an acute
geriatric unit. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 48(1), 35–39. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2007.09.008 PMID:18022709
Zhang, Y., Li, H., & Zou, Y. (2019). The effect of self-concept on the relationship between reminiscence therapy and
mental health among Chinese elderly: A latent interaction model. Current Psychology (New Brunswick, N.J.), 38(4),
853–859. doi:10.100712144-017-9652-2
Zhang, Y., Zhang, L., Sun, Y., & Chen, Y. (2019). Effects of reminiscence therapy on cognitive functions, depression,
and quality of life in Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association,
20(9), 1114–1122. doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2019.03.022
Zhou, W., Chen, W., & Wang, Z. (2019). Study on the effects of reminiscence therapy on elderly depression. International
Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 23(3), 194–199. doi:10.1080/13651501.2019.1581582 PMID:30848166
Zhu, L. J., Yu, J., Zhang, R., & Hu, Z. W. (2019). The efficacy of reminiscence therapy for elderly patients with cognitive
impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 67(1), 331–343. doi:10.3233/
JAD-180576
362
﻿
About the Contributors
Luís Vieira Ribeiro is a professor and director of the School of Health - University of Algarve;
PhD in Physical Activity and Health - University of Coimbra; Title of Specialist in Radiology / Imaging
(Code CNAEF 725) - University of Algarve/ IPC, Coimbra Health School/ IPL, Lisbon Health School,
Portugal (Title equivalent to PhD at university attributed by a consortium of three institutions of higher
education according to Portuguese law); Master in Medical Imaging - University of Algarve; Master in
Motor Development and Adaptation, and Postgraduate in Economics and Management of Health Organizations
- University of Coimbra. Degree in Radiology and in Sports Science and Physical Education
- University of Coimbra. Professional activity in the field of Radiology since 1995, from 2006 onwards
teaching in higher education.
Anabela de Magalhães Ribeiro has a PhD in Health Sciences, Specialization in Gestion de Calidad
Asistencial, Gestion Clinica y de Recursos de Enfermeria. Faculdad Medicina, Universidad de Murcia;
Master in Medical Imaging, University of Algarve; Degree in Law, University of Porto; Degree in
Radiology, Polytechnic Institute of Porto; Post-graduation in Economics and Management, Faculty of
Economics, University of Algarve; Invited Adjunct Professor at School of Health, University of Algarve.
Coordenator of the Radiology Department, Unit of Portimão, University Hospital Center of Algarve.
***
Marja Äijö, PhD, is a principal lecture of gerontology and rehabilitation in Savonia University of
Applied Sciences department of Health and Social care since 2008. She is doctor of Health Sciences,
Master of sport medicine, Master of Education and Physiotherapist. Her specific research area concerning
of gerontology, physical activity, rehabilitation and education. Especially she is interested in to
develop and study new pedagogical methods in health care education. At the Savonia UAS, Marja Äijö
is responsible teacher of physiotherapy bachelor’s degree program and rehabilitation master’s degree
programme. In addition, she leading and participate several research and development projects.
Nuno César Barbosa is an orthopedics senior resident.
Aikaterini Christogianni has a Ph.D. in Experimental and Thermal Physiology from Loughborough
University in the UK. She received her MSc in Clinical Neuropsychology at the University of Groningen
in the Netherlands, during which she was trained in clinical neuropsychological testing procedures,
screening, diagnosing, and motoring people with neurological and mental health diseases/disorders. She
363
About the Contributors
has worked as a clinical manager and has knowledge of medical devices, Big Data, wearables and care
management in healthcare systems. She is interested in improving patients’ quality of life in healthcare,
hospitals, clinics, and at home.
Amanda Clifford is an Associate Professor in Physiotherapy at the University of Limerick with over
15 years of lecturing and research experience. She has published over 70 peer-reviewed articles the research
programme of work includes the design and evaluation of evidence-based interventions to optimise
health and wellbeing, and prevent falls in older people, and people with orthopaedic and neurological
conditions. She previously worked clinically in the UK in the Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals,
NHS Trust, the Whittington Hospital, NHS Trust London, UK and the Wellington Hospital, St. John’s
Wood London; with experience in the treatment of people on acute medical wards, ICU and rehabilitation
settings including a neurological rehabilitation unit and an outpatient falls clinic. Outpatients experience
includes the management people with acute and chronic orthopaedic and rheumatological conditions.
Carla Damásio has a PhD in Nursing by the University of Lisbon. Bachelor and master’s in educational
sciences, Nurse Specialist in Medical-Surgical Nursing, Postgraduate Degree in Medical-Surgical
Nursing, in Ozone Therapy and in Risk and Well-Being in Organizations. Since 2009 has been Assistant
Professor in the scientific area of Nursing Science. Departmental Coordinator of Mobility, Chair of the
Pedagogical Council (2015 - 2017), currently Coordinator of the Higher Technical Professional Course
in Gerontology. Research on ciTechCare - Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology. Since
February 2018 she is part of the Group of Studies and Reflection in Narrative Medicine (GERMEN),
Since April 2019 she is foreign collaborator of the Research Group Networks, Sociability and Power,
of the Federal University of Pernambuco - UFPE (Brazil). Member of the Editorial Board of artciencia.
com, co-Editor of Health Academy Kastamonu Journal.
Helena de Almeida is an Assistant Professor (with the title of Aggregation in Economics and Business
Management) of School of Economics at the University of Algarve (FEUAlg) in Portugal since 1999,
and Director of the International Master in Management. Participant-member of the Research Center
for Tourism, Sustainability and Well-being (CinTurs), published 34 articles in peer-reviewed journals
(Scopus Author Id: P-6010-2017; ), 7 book chapters, 3 books and 2 handbooks. She received 3 awards
and honours and participated as a researcher in 2 projects co-financed by the Science and Technology
Foundation. In her CIÊNCIAVITAE (Ciência ID: 751C-C12F-461A), the most frequent terms in the
scientific context are Healthcare, Structural Empowerment, Engagement, Clustering, Smart Tourism,
Smart Cities, Economic Cooperation, Job satisfaction, Quality and well-being”.
Aastha Dhingra is an Assistant Professor at SGT University in Gurugram and a clinical Psychologist.
She was a former Psychologist on the Juvenile Justice Board of Gurugram’s Panel. For the past ten
years, she has worked as a trainer for a variety of educational and business institutions across India. She
has more than 30 publications in national and international journals including scopus, to her name and
have written and edited two books. She has been a guest expert speaker on psychology, career advice,
and mental health for NDTV Prime, Disha TV, Aajtk, Times Now, and India Today. She assists various
students in understanding the purpose of life in terms of lifestyle, family, and, most importantly, career
by providing constructive feedback and being a good communicator. Her work has been recognised by
a number of institutions across India, including the Gurgaon District Administration.
364
About the Contributors
Gonçalo Dias has a Ph.D. and is Professor at the Faculty of Sport Sciences and Physical Education
of University of Coimbra; Professor at the Coimbra Education School of Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra.
Over the past 15 years, I have been conducting scientific research on several areas associated to
Motor Control, Active and Healthy Ageing, Sports Sciences, Sports Medicine, Performance Analysis in
Sport, Motor Behavior, among others. This resulted in more than 100 scientific articles in international
journals and 15 books. Reviewer and Editor of several relevant journals. I have been invited for lecturing,
tutoring and organization of events (e.g., Master’s degrees, PhD programs, professional courses,
national and international conferences. .
Heidi-Tuulia Eklund is a teacher in music and drama, has 27 years of experience in teaching music.
She is a PhD Researcher of Music, Art and Culture Studies at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland.
She is involved in developments related to process drama, art education and teacher education in Salo,
Southwest Finland. Heidi-Tuulia has experience in Lied and Opera, and she has a diploma in classical
singing. Heidi-Tuulia has participated in work within a European AAL project involving information
management and process descriptions.
Patrik Eklund has a PhD in mathematics and is professor in computer science at Umeå University,
Sweden. He is involved in research both on the theoretical as well the applied side. Patrik’s logic and
process developments include solutions for crisis management, social choice, and information management
in social and health care. Patrik Eklund has experience from participation in European research projects.
Maria Farinha has an MSc in Professional Development, Specialization in Rehabilitation Nursing, RN
Maria Ferreira has a PhD in Psychology, Master in Educational Sciences, Specialization in Pediatrics
and Child Health Nursing, RN.
Ana Paula de Fontes has a PhD in Public Health in 2015/02/15 by the Faculty of Medical Sciences
of the University Nova de Lisboa, Degree in Physiotherapy in 2005 by the Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon
School of Health Technology of Lisbon and Bachelor of Physiotherapy in 1986 by the Polytechnic
Institute of Lisbon School of Health Technology in Lisbon. Researcher at University Nova de Lisboa
Interdisciplinary Center for Social Sciences. Director of the degree course in Physiotherapy at the School
of Health at the University of Algarve.
Vaitsa Giannouli, Ph.D. is a postdoctoral researcher in Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Greece and serves as adjunct lecturer at the European University Cyprus,
Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences and Department of Psychology, University of Western
Macedonia. Her research interests are focused on, but not limited to neuropsychology, geropsychology,
biopsychology, and cognitive psychology. She received a B.S. and M.S. in Psychology from Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, a Ph.D. in Neuroscience from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, and a
M.S. in Health Care Management from Hellenic Open University. Prior to her current position she was
a postdoctoral researcher at Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Neurobiology and School of
Medicine, University of Ioannina, Greece.
365
About the Contributors
Tânia Gonçalves has a PhD student in Nursing, MSc in Health Care Services Management, Specialization
in Community/Public Health Nursing, RN.
Catherine Hayes is Professor of Health Professions Pedagogy and Scholarship at the University of
Sunderland, UK. She is a UK National Teaching Fellow and Principal Fellow of the UK Higher Education
Academy. As a graduate of Podiatric Medicine in 1992, Catherine was a Founding Fellow of the
Faculty of Podiatric Medicine at the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons (Glasgow) in 2012 and
was awarded Fellowship of the Royal College of Podiatry (London) in 2010. She is currently Programme
Leader of the University of Sunderland’s Professional Doctorate pathways for the DBA, EdD, DPM and
DProf.
Waheeda Khan was Former Professor & Head, D/O Psychology, Jamia Millia Islamia, Central
University, New Delhi. She is presently Dean Faculty of Behavioral Sciences SGT University, Gurgaon.
She has served as Head of the Department (July 2010 – June 2013), and the Director of Sarojni Naidu
Centre for Women’s Studies (2009 – 2010); and the University Counseling & Guidance Centre (2009-
14) of Jamia Millia Islamia (a Central University), New Delhi, India. She has been the co-ordinator of
IGNOU study Centre at Jamia Millia Islamia, where more than 2500 students are enrolled in psychology
and various other disciplines under UG and PG programs. She has more than 25 years of teaching,
research and administrative experience in higher education. She has so far supervised 20 Ph.D students,
and currently 7 other scholars are pursuing research under her guidance. Besides, she has also supervised
60 Master’s students for their field training and research projects, including 6 students from Linkoping
University, Sweden. She has to her credit over 60 research papers including 20 book chapters published/
accepted for publication in reputed indexed journals. She has also presented her work at 25 international
and 40 national conferences.
Marina Kovatchki is a Medical Student, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University
of Algarve, Portugal; Registered Nurse, School of Health Sciences, University of Algarve, Portugal.
Cristiana Lameira has been, since 2021, a student of Bsc in Sport and Leisure - Fitness, Sports and
Fitness Activities (Instituto Politécnico de Coimbra - Escola Superior de Educação, Portugal). Teach
classes as an assistant in programs of Physical Activity for older people as in workplace for adults.
Carmen Macedo has a PhD in Psychology in the area of “Families at psychosocial risk: Family
functioning, parenting skills, social support and well-being.” Master in Clinical and Health Psychology.
Degree in Psychology. Postgraduate Course in Strategies and Interventions in Crisis and Emergency
Situations. Research in the area “Social support, negative life events and adaptation in families with
minors at psychosocial risk.” Conducts research focused on “Psychosocial Intervention applicable in
situations of Serious Accidents or Catastrophe.”
Cristina Marques-Vieira has a PhD in Nursing, MSc in Organizational Behaviour and Management,
Specialization in Rehabilitation Nursing, RN
Ana Marreiros holds a PhD in Quantitative Methods Applied to Economics and Management,
specializing in Statistics. She has more than 20 years of experience in data processing and teaching in
366
About the Contributors
the areas of statistics and operational research. Currently, she is an exclusive Assistant Professor at the
Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences and Coordinator of the Medical Education Unit. She
has developed clinical research in the areas of rheumatology, cardiology, neurology and oncology. Her
research interest focuses on the development of multivariate algorithms applied to clinical research and
medical education. She is the author of over 20 articles and is also a member of the Algarve Biomedical
Center Research Institute.
Rui Mendes has the following academic titles: 1) Aggregate in Sport Sciences - Motor Control and
Learning (University of Trás os Montes e Alto-Douro, 2020-06-24), 2) 4-yr Ph.D. in Human Movement
Sciences - Motor Behaviour (University of Lisbon, 1996-1999), 3) 2-yr Msc in Motor Development (University
of Lisbon, 1992-1994), 4) 5-yr Bsc in Physical Education (University of Lisbon, 1985-1990). High
School at Maria Lamas (Torres Novas, 1984) and Elementary School (Riachos, 1975). In Polytechnic
Institute of Coimbra is: I) in Coimbra School of Education: 1) Full Professor - Professor Coordenador,
2) Applied Sport Sciences Research Unit (UNICID-ASSERT) - Director, 3) Early Motor Development
and Play - Msc Degree Director, 4) Scientific Group of Sport Sciences and Kinetics - Coordinator; II)
in Institute of Applied Research: Laboratory ROBOCORP - member. At the University of Coimbra is
a member Research Unit for Sport and Physical Activity (CIDAF). Born in Riachos - Torres Novas,
Portugal. Author Identifiers: 1) Ciência ID: A71F-1E22-D496; 2) ORCID iD: 0000-0002-2433-5193.
Rodrigo Mendes has an academic degree of Bsc in Sport Sciences and Leisure - Sports Training
(Instituto Politécnico de Coimbra - Escola Superior de Educação, Portugal, 2000-2022). Since 2022,
student of Msc in Teaching of Physical Education in Basic and Secondary School (University of Coimbra
- Faculty of Sport Sciences and Physical Education, Portugal). Teacher of Racquet Sports in Higher
Education and Tennis Coach whit a Grad 1 Certificate. Author Identifiers: 1) Ciência ID - 7A15-FE66-
F13C; 2) ORCID - 0000-0002-0621-4881.
Maria do Céu Neves has an MSc in Educational Sciences, Specialization in Paediatrics and Infant
Health Nursing, RN
Irene O Bryne Maguire provides clinical risk advices, support, education and data analysis to reduce
litigation risks and claims exposure within the publicly-funded health and social care system. Over
twenty years experience in quality care, safety and risk management, delivering professional services
and complex, collaborative change management projects within health and social care, including Open
Disclosure, National Incident Management System (NIMS) and AFFINITY (falls prevention & bone
health) with a European dimension. She is project lead for high performing teams to a national, multiprofessional,
healthcare risk advisory team, organisational collaborator for continuous performance
management and co-convenor of the OPUS Listening Post for Ireland. Irene is a Chartered Physiotherapist,
with post-graduate qualifications in risk and quality management, education, governance and
organisational development. She is a member of OPUS, the Irish Group Relations Organisation (IGRO)
executive, OPUS International Listening Post Steering Group, the Institute for Occupational Safety &
Health (IOSH) and CORU.
M. Adelaide Paiva - Contributing Author| M. Adelaide Paiva has an MSc in Public Health, Specialization
in Community/Public Health Nursing, RN.
367
About the Contributors
Acácio Ramos is an orthopaedic surgeon.
Hawa Zanzeh is a recent graduate of the University of Algarve where she studied for a MSc Management
with a specialization in Healthcare. Prior to this, she worked as an administration/customer service
officer for Africa Health Holdings Ltd. a healthcare management firm with an aim to build Africa’s
healthcare future and foster optimal care outcomes.
368
﻿
Index
﻿
A
Active Ageing 137
Ambulation 116, 121, 135
Assessment framework 1-3, 5-6, 10, 141-142
assessment of functioning 1-2, 5, 8
assessment of learning 2-4, 7-8
assessment tools 33, 140, 170, 173
B
Biomedical Model 50-51, 53
Biopsychosocial model 50-51
C
chronic disease 121, 157-158, 160, 163
Classification and Regression Tree 192, 197, 204, 210
Cloud Computing 232, 236-237
Cognitive Deficits 22, 32, 170, 172-173, 175, 177,
179, 191
Cognitive Domains 22, 24, 171, 178, 191
Comprehensive Framework 71, 78
Contextual Factors 28, 50, 54-55, 68-69, 291
curriculum planning 2
D
Dementia 22, 24-25, 31, 47, 78, 120-121, 170-179, 191
Disability And Health 8, 13-14, 69, 141
drama process 6-8
E
Elderly Care 72, 237, 239, 244, 249, 255, 258, 261,
264, 270, 274-277
Elders 25, 232, 239-240, 242, 244
equine-assisted therapy 103-106, 108, 113
F
Facilitators 69
falls prevention 5, 9, 116-117, 121-123, 137-144,
146-149
Financial Abuse 30, 33-34, 47, 293
Financial Capacity 21-27, 30-32, 34, 47
Financial Capacity/Competence 23, 47
functional disability 83
G
Gerontology 73, 116-117, 135, 277
H
health care professional 224
Health Economics 171, 191
health promotion 60, 285
Health service 140, 172, 177, 212, 267
Hippotherapy 111
Home-based Care 273, 275
I
International Classification of Functioning 8, 13-14,
48, 50, 141
Internet of Things 231
interprofessional education 148
M
many-valuedness 9
Mild Cognitive Impairment 22, 25, 170-171, 191
mobilization 82-84, 194
Model Of Functioning 69
Multivariate Analysis 200
369
Index
N
Neurocognitive Disorders 21-22, 47
Neuropsychological Assessment 21-24, 31, 47
Neuropsychological Testing 33, 170-171, 178-179, 191
Normative Data 170, 172, 174, 176, 179-180, 191
nursing intervention 157
O
Old Age 8, 23, 33, 47, 117-119, 126, 128, 170, 172,
261-262, 271, 277, 294
older person 26, 34, 118, 137, 143-144, 146, 261, 289
Osteoarthrosis 210
P
Patient compliance 157, 166
Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) 196,
210
Performance-Based Measures 31, 194, 210
PERMA Model 71, 75-78
Personal Factors 50, 57
Person-Centered Approach 23, 69
physical activity 82-84, 88, 104, 124, 138-139, 143,
164-165, 179, 259-260
Physiology 119, 127-129, 136, 193, 243
Polypharmacy 127-128, 136
Psychology 72, 77, 123, 136
Psychometrics 177, 191
Q
quality of life 21, 48, 53, 71-74, 77-78, 82-83, 111-113,
119, 137, 141, 158, 163, 165, 170, 172, 178, 193,
274-275, 285-286, 290, 293, 295
quantale 10, 17-20
R
Range of Motion 103, 111, 113, 192, 194-195, 197, 202
rehabilitation 50, 58, 140, 144, 193-194, 204, 239,
268-269, 271, 273, 277
Residential Care 73, 116, 140-141, 271-272, 275,
277, 295
S
Sensing and Actuation as-a-service 232, 237
Service quality 211, 213, 215, 222-223, 225-227
Six-Minute Walk Test 194, 210
Social Model 51
Social Services for Elderly 273
stressful and risk life events 290
T
therapeutic 14, 51, 54, 58, 71-72, 103-104, 113, 157-
158, 160, 162-167, 268
Total Knee Arthroplasty 192-193, 204, 210
W
WOMAC Index 194, 196, 203-204, 210
World Health Organization 8, 13, 21, 148, 170-171,
250, 259, 285, 287
370