<<<<<<< HEAD
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A 1063 (2024) 169303
Available online 31 March 2024
0168-9002/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Dark matter event in nuclear emulsions II: Ionic relaxation
and recombination
Tadaaki Tani a,*, Takashi Asada b, Takayuki Uchida c, Tatsuhiro Naka d,e
a Soc. Photogr. Imaging Jpn., 2933-2, Yoshidajima, Kaisei-machi, Ashigarakami-gun, Kanagawa, 258-0021, Japan
b Department of Physics, University of Naples Fererico II, Complesso Universitario di Monte Sant’Angelo-Via Cinthia, 21, 80126, Napoli, Italy
c Graduate School of Engineering, Tokyo Polytechnic University, 1583, Atsugi, Kanagawa, 243-0297, Japan
d Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Toho University, Miyama, Funabashi, 274-8501, Japan
e Kobayashi-Masukawa Institute, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Dark matter
Nuclear emulsion
Silver halide grain
Recombination
Ionic relaxation
A B S T R A C T
The previous paper has indicated that it is important to depress both direct recombination and reverse reaction
between ionic relaxation products, i.e., latent image centers (Agn) and Br2 for dark matter (DM) detection by a
super-fine-grained nuclear emulsion named NIT. This paper describes the results of the analyses on the reverse
reaction in the NIT containing a typical halogen acceptor Na2SO3 (SS), which is used to make the NIT sensitive.
The electronic structure of the NIT layer containing SS as measured by means of photo-electron yield spectroscopy
in air revealed that Ag(SO3)23􀀀 was formed in emulsions and could become to be Ag(SO3)22􀀀 by giving an
electron to Br2. Although SS could not stop the reverse reaction, SS made it so slow that SS could make the NIT
with SS available for DM detection when the irradiated NIT layers were kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦C to
􀀀 50 ◦C) in order to bring about further slowdown of the reaction rate. It is thought that Ag(SO3)22􀀀 took a place of
Br2 for the reverse reaction and decreased its rate, since the diffusion of Ag(SO3)22􀀀 , which is electrically charged
and large in size, is slower than that of Br2 owing to attractive interaction between Ag(SO3)22􀀀 and many ionized
substituents in gelatin. Discussions are made on ideas to depress further the reverse reaction.
1. Introduction
Dark matter (DM) is one of the most interesting and important subjects
to be solved in cosmology and astronomy, and has not yet been
determined until now. It is widely assumed that undefined elementary
particles (e.g., Weakly Interacting Massive Particles or WIMPs) are the
constituents of DM. We are advancing plans to detect the WIMPs using
experimental methods, and aim to detect the recoil of nucleus caused by
WIMPs coming against the direction of our Solar System within the
Milky Way under a low-background environment.
A variety of experiments have been developed over recent decades,
aiming to detect these particles via their elastic interaction in a detector
medium [1]. A possible detector to distinguish such recoil events from
other radiation background events is a track detector with directional
sensitivity. As such a detector, we utilize a solid-state track detector
named Nano Image Tracker (NIT), a dedicated nuclear emulsion with a
spatial resolution better than a few hundred nanometers [2,3]. The NIT
was developed by forming AgBr0.96I0.04 grains (denoted AgBrI grains in
this paper) with about 40 nm and 70 nm in equivalent spherical diameter
to meet the predicted track length of the nuclear recoils [4].
While this detector has been proven to detect the tracks of slow ions,
we are currently focused on understanding this phenomenon from the
perspective of photographic science. Recently, its applications have
expanded beyond its original purpose of dark matter detection, e.g.,
neutron measurement [5] and quantum diffraction imaging [6], owing
to its high special resolution. This diversification of use underscores the
growing importance of fundamentally understanding the detector.
The fundamental knowledge of photographic processes is briefly
summarized below [7]. Silver halide (AgX) grains in the photographic
emulsion layer undergo electron-hole pair creation due to photoexcitation
or ionization. An electron is captured by a site with electric charge
of +1/2 such as a silver ion at a kink site on the grain surface (electronic
process). Then, the captured electron attracts and reacts with an interstitial
silver ion to form a silver atom on the site (ionic process). A latent
image center is composed of a silver cluster and is formed by the
alternate repetition of electronic and ionic processes at the same site
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tadaakitani@mbr.nifty.com (T. Tani).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nima
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2024.169303
Received 18 August 2023; Received in revised form 21 February 2024; Accepted 30 March 2024
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
2
with electric charge of +1/2 after changing its charge between 􀀀 1/2
and + 1/2. Among AgX grains, only the grain with one or more latent
image centers on its surface contribute to the formation of a silver grain.
It has been estimated that the smallest latent image center is composed
of 4–5 silver atoms in such emulsions as the NIT, which are not
gold-sensitized [7].
Latent image formation is counteracted by recombination processes
between electrons and positive holes. In the previous paper, we have
characterized the DM event in the NIT, and revealed that three kinds of
recombination processes are taking place as illustrated in Fig. 1 [3]. One
of them is the direct recombination between free electrons and free
positive holes, which takes place in the time range from about 100 fs to
about 20 ns. Electrons and positive holes, which have escaped from the
direct recombination, are captured by electron traps and positive hole
traps, respectively, and facing with indirect recombination of trapped
electrons with free positive holes and that of trapped positive holes with
free electrons [8], respectively. However, ionic conductivity is overwhelmingly
larger than electronic one in AgX grains in a dark environment,
resulting in the occurrence of ionic relaxation processes in
prior to indirect recombination ones [7]. Thus, most trapped electrons
react with interstitial silver ions to form Agn, while most trapped positive
holes react with silver ion vacancies to form Br2. It is noted that Br2
molecules are deactivated by gelatin when gelatin is present in abundance.
The other recombination process is the reverse reaction between
latent image centers Agn and irradiation-created Br2, and essentially
important for DM detection by the NIT, as described below.
The essential property of the NIT for DM detection in terms of the
above-stated reverse reaction could be made clear by comparing the
characteristics among the four typical emulsions with AgBrI grains as
sensors. They are emulsions for DM detection, minimum ionizing particle
(MIP) detection (e.g., for OPERA experiment), radiation therapy
[9], and picture-taking. Table 1 shows the results of the collection and
analysis of the knowledge on the characteristics of the above-stated four
emulsions. As shown in this table, the amount of irradiation-created Br2
with respect to the amount of gelatin in the NIT for DM detection is
estimated to be extremely large among them, indicating the concern that
the latent image formation in the NIT should tend to seriously suffer
from the reverse reaction between latent image centers and Br2 from the
viewpoint of the fact that the ability of gelatin to deactivate Br2 is
limited. This problem comes from the following reasons. In order to
meet predicted track length of a nuclear recoil of a WIMP, the NIT were
designed to make AgBrI grains the smallest and most abundant in
number among the four AgBrI systems. While each grain creates photoelectrons
in it to form a latent image center composed of Agn, the same
number of positive holes are created in it to form Br2 molecules. Since
the grain concentration in the NIT is the highest among the four emulsion
layers, the concentration of irradiation-created Br2 associated with
latent image formation is the highest in the NIT.
In addition, the number of electron-hole pairs per grain created by a
nuclear recoil of a WIMP is estimated to be much larger than those
created by irradiation in the emulsions for MIP detection and picturetaking.
It was estimated that the smallest latent image center was
composed of Ag4 or Ag5 and Ag2Au in S-sensitized and S + Au-sensitized
emulsions, respectively [7]. It was also evaluated that about 10
electron-hole pairs per grain were needed to form a latent image center
on an AgBrI grain in a fully S + Au-sensitized emulsion for picture-taking
[7], and about 30 electron-hole pairs in an S + Au-sensitized AgBrI grain
with about 200 nm in diameter in an OPERA emulsion, in which a
neutrino-induced high energy particle (i.e., MIP) forms 15–30
electron-hole pairs per grain. It is noted that the number of electron-hole
pairs per grain created by photoexcitation for picture-taking and that by
ionization for the OPERA experiment are comparable to those needed
for latent image formation in the corresponding emulsions to give
optimized results. On the other hand, it is predicted that the number of
electron-hole pairs in an AgBrI grain with about 70 nm in diameter
created by a nuclear recoil of the WIMP in the NIT is as many as 1800,
being much larger than that needed for the formation of a latent image
center on each grain in S + Au-sensitized emulsions. However, positive
holes with the same large number are at the same time formed in the
grain, and should be deactivated to keep latent image centers from being
attacked by Br2, which are formed by irradiation-created positive holes.
It is known that Br2 could be deactivated by gelatin with methionine
residues as active sites [10] in emulsions for picture-taking. However, it
is concerned that gelatin can’t deactivate Br2 well in the case of DM
detection, since the ratio of the amount of irradiation-created Br2 with
respect to that of gelatin in the NIT layer is extremely large, and the
population of methionine residues in gelatin is as small as 0.4 % [11]. It
is therefore considered from the above-stated analyses that the most
important subject for the latent image formation in the NIT for DM
detection is, not the depression of the indirect recombination process (2
in Fig. 1) by S + Au sensitization centers, which is the most important in
highly sensitive emulsions for picture-taking and in the OPERA emulsion
for MIP detection, but the depression of the reverse reaction process
between latent image centers (Agn) and irradiation-created Br2 (3 in
Fig. 1).
As summarized in Table 1, Agn in usual photographic films could
survive against the reverse reaction owing to the deactivation of Br2 by
abundant gelatin with methionine residues as active sites. In nuclear
emulsions, gelatin cannot protect Agn sufficiently against the reverse
reaction owing to the fact that the volume fraction of gelatin in nuclear
emulsions is much smaller than that in usual photographic emulsions.
The reverse reaction between latent image centers and Br2 was observed
[12] and analyzed in nuclear emulsions for cosmic ray imaging [13]. In
addition, the amount of irradiation-created Br2 with respect to the
amount of gelatin is the largest in the NIT for DM detection. In order to
overcome this problem, sodium sulfite (SS), which is regarded as a
typical halogen acceptor (i.e., a compound with ability to deactivate a
halogen molecule) in AgX photography, is added to the NIT to enhance
their sensitivity to nuclear recoils of the WIMPs instead of using
sulfur-plus-gold (S + Au) sensitization. However, the performance of SS
in the NIT has not been analyzed until now. Thus, we have focused our
study on the effect of SS on the reverse reaction between Agn and Br2 to
make clear its performance in the NIT.
In order to study the reaction between Agn and Br2 in the NIT in the
presence of SS, it is necessary to know their electronic structure
composed of the electronic energy levels of AgBrI grains, Agn, Br2, SS,
complex ions of SS with Ag+ in gelatin phase, and the organic layers,
which are deposited on the surfaces of samples from air containing
various gases and floating organic substances as described later. In this
paper, we have prepared multiple NIT samples and measured the
Fig. 1. Three kinds of recombination processes taking place in AgBrI grains [1;
direct recombination process between free electrons and free positive holes, 2
and 2’; indirect recombination processes between trapped electrons and free
positive holes and between trapped positive holes and free electrons, respectively,
3; reverse reaction between Agn and Br2 formed through ionic relaxation
processes], where ● and ○ are an electron and a positive hole, respectively, CB
and VB are conduction and valence bands, respectively, and Ag⚪+
and Ag◻- are
an interstitial silver ion and a silver ion vacancy, respectively.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
3
electronic energy levels of these materials by means of an apparatus of
photo-electron yield spectroscopy in air (PYSA). It involves illuminating
the sample with ultraviolet light in air and measuring the relationship
between the energy of the photons and the photoelectron yield, determining
the electronic energy levels of substances in the sample. Hence,
understanding the reverse reaction, it has been revealed that the reaction
process of irradiation-created Agn and Br2, is crucial for controlling
the NIT’s performance.
2. Samples and experiments
The samples, which were subjected to the PYSA measurement, were
NIT layers with or without SS, dried layers of gelatin solutions, to which
SS and/or AgNO3 solutions were added, thin layers of Ag, and Ag
nanoparticles. The NIT layer contained AgBrI grains (about 70 nm in
equivalent spherical diameter) [4] as sensors. The grains occupied 35%
in volume of the dried emulsion layer. SS was introduced into the
emulsion layer by adding its aqueous solution to the NIT emulsion
before coating (pre-mix method) or by dipping the NIT layer in an
aqueous solution of SS (dip method). By use of the above-stated samples,
the PYSA was used to measure the electronic energy levels of AgBrI and
SS in the NIT, those of SS and AgNO3 in gelatin layers, and those of silver
particles with varied size.
In order to get fundamental aspects of the reverse processes, the NIT
layers with and without SS were irradiated by αrays and γ rays of 241Am
source. C ion beams have been considered to use for the simulation of
DM detection experiments since C ions are expected to be the most
abundant among probable nuclear recoils of WIMPs in the NIT layers
composed of elements such as Ag, Br, I, H, N, and O ions. However, it
was difficult to use C ion beams for the purpose of this study owing to the
fact that the penetration depth of C ion beams in emulsion layers was
estimated to be too short to get accurate experimental results. Therefore,
in this experiment, alpha rays that generate a similar number of
electron-hole pairs per grain were used as a substitute for C ion beam,
and also as a target for comparison with gamma rays to get the dependence
of the reverse reaction on the number of electron-hole pairs per
grain. The number of electron-hole pairs created by irradiation in an
AgBrI grain with 70 nm in diameter was estimated to be 1000–2000 for a
nuclear recoil induced by WIMPs and α-rays, and 100–200 for γray on
the basis of the fact that an electron-hole pair was formed by the
deposited energy of 5.8 eV in AgBr [14].
The NIT were irradiated and kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦C ~
-50 ◦C) in air before development for the simulation of the DM detection
experiment, and were subjected to their storage under conditions with
varied temperature and time period before they were subjected to
development for the observation of the change in the amount of latent
image centers during the storage. Photographic development process
was made at 5 ◦C for 10 min by use of MAA developer [4]. The readout of
developed Ag grains was made under an epi-illuminate optical microscope
by observing scattered light of the localized surface plasmon
resonance in each grain.
The decay of latent image centers, which were formed by the irradiation
of αand γrays to emulsion layers at room temperature (15 ◦C),
was given by the ratio of the number of latent image centers observed
just after the irradiation to that observed after the irradiated layer was
kept for a time period t under a certain condition, and was called relative
sensitivity in this paper. While the relative number of latent image
centers created by α rays was given by the average brightness of the
scattered light from developed Ag grains in nuclear tracks, the number
of latent image centers created by γ rays was given by the number of
light spots scattered from developed Ag grains in the layer.
The electronic energy levels of various materials in the NIT were
measured by means of PYSA [15] with an apparatus (Riken Keiki, AC-2),
which can detect electrons with binding energy of less than 6 eV.
Photo-electrons were observed weakly from gelatin layers in the energy
range with slightly less than 6 eV in binding energy, and were attributed
to the organic layers deposited from air on their surfaces [16]. It is
known that organic substances are always floating in air and are being
deposited on sample surfaces as was revealed by observing the Fermi
levels of thin metal layers, which were changing in air with time after
their preparation [16]. The deposited organic layers influence the
physical properties of samples and in particular change the Fermi levels
of metals through the pinning of their Fermi levels [16] and the
push-back effect [17]. As the evidence for the deposition of organic
substances from air on sample surfaces, the photoelectron emission from
C 1s orbitals is always observed in the X-ray photoelectron spectra of the
samples, which do not contain carbon atoms [18]. The electronic energy
level of the valence band maximum at the surfaces of AgBrI grains in the
NIT layer was given by the observed threshold energy of the PYSA
spectra of the grains in the layer [19]. As reference experiments, gelatin
layers, to which aqueous solutions of SS and/or AgNO3 were added
before coating, were subjected to PYSA measurements.
The electronic energy levels of latent image centers composed of Agn
were evaluated by measuring and analyzing PYSA spectra of thin layers
of Ag, which were vacuum-deposited on glass plates, and became to be
isolated nanoparticles when the average thickness of evaporated Ag
layers was less than 10 nm [20]. When the electronic energy difference
between Fermi level and the vacuum level is F, the ionization energy (I)
and electron affinity (EA) of metal nanoparticles with diameter of d are
F + E, and F – E, respectively, where E is a function of 1/d [21,22]. Since
latent image centers are composed of very small Ag clusters, their
electronic structures should differ from those of Ag in bulk. Then, a
study has been made on the size-dependent electronic energy levels of
Ag nanoparticles deposited on glass plates by means of the PYSA
apparatus.
The influence of air on the electronic energy levels of materials
concerned was judged by the Fermi level of the organic layers deposited
on them. The Fermi levels of the organic layers were evaluated by
observing the equalization of Fermi levels of the organic layers with such
metal layers as Ag, Au, and Pt, whose Fermi levels in vacuum are well
known and are so diversified as 􀀀 4.3 eV, 􀀀 5.1 eV, and 􀀀 5.65 eV,
respectively [17].
3. Results and discussions
3.1. Electronic energy levels of materials in AgBrI emulsion layers
In order to analyze the reverse reaction between latent image centers
Table 1
Characterization of typical detectors with AgBrI grains as sensors.
Purpose DM detection MIP detection Rad. Therapy Taking picture
Excitation source Heavy particle (low velocity) MIP Heavy particle (high velocity) Visible light
Size of grains (track length) ~70 nm (<1 μm) ~200 nm (<1 mm) ~200 nm ~1000 nm
No. of chem. sens. centers ~30/grain ~300/grain ~300/grain ~7500/grain
No. of e-h+pairs (irrad. time) 1000-2000 /grain (100 fs) ~30/grain (1 fs) >5000/grain ≧10/grain (1 ms)
Volume ratio of gelatin 65% 45–70% ~70% 80–90%
No. of Br2/cm3 ~5╳1018 0.5–4╳1015 5╳1017~ 2-5╳1012~
Ways for sensitization Dense traps
Br2 depression
Au + S sensitization Au + S sensitization Au + S sensitization
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
4
and irradiation-created Br2 molecules taking place in the NIT for DM
detection, it is necessary to get the knowledge of the electronic energy
levels of the materials in relation to this phenomenon. They are AgBr
grain, Br2 on the grain surface, silver cluster and silver in bulk state,
organic layer deposited from air, and Ag(SO3)23􀀀 , which is formed in the
emulsion owing to the reaction between Ag+ and SO3􀀀 . In the subsequent
paragraphs of this subsection, we explain how we determined their
electronic energy levels.
The electronic energy levels of materials in the NIT, which have been
made through the experiments described later, are shown in Fig. 2. Since
gelatin is used as a binder for the NIT, it is considered that the electronic
energy levels of materials in a gelatin layer are the same as those in the
NIT layer. The threshold energy of the PYSA spectra of AgBrI grains in
nuclear emulsions indicated that the energy difference between the top
of the valence band of the grains and the vacuum level was about 5.6 eV
[19]. It is therefore considered that the electron affinity (EA) of Br2 on
the grain surface is about 5.6 eV, since Br2 is formed by the ionic
relaxation of positive holes trapped on the grain surface.
Organic layers deposited from air on samples are characterized
below. It is known that organic materials together with various gases in
air are deposited on the surfaces of samples to form organic layers [16].
It is considered that samples are oxidized when the Fermi level of the
samples is higher than that of the deposited organic layers from air,
causing the electron transfer for the Fermi level equalization between
them. Thus, the Fermi level of the deposited organic layers from air was
estimated by measuring the electronic structures of the interfaces between
the organic layers and various metals, whose Fermi levels in
vacuum were well known. While the Fermi levels of clean Ag, Au, and Pt
in vacuum were largely diversified to be 􀀀 4.3 eV, 􀀀 5.1 eV, and 􀀀 5.65
eV, respectively [17], the observed Fermi levels of their thin layers
deposited on glass plates were nearly the same (􀀀 4.71 eV, 􀀀 4.73 eV, and
􀀀 4.76 eV, respectively) in air [16,23], and indicated that the Fermi level
of the deposited organic layers from air on the their surfaces pinned the
Fermi levels of thin layers of these metals, and was estimated to be the
average of the observed Fermi levels of the thin layers of these metals, i.
e., 􀀀 4.73 eV. It is noted that the actually observed Fermi levels of thin
metal layers were fluctuated as seen later in this study, since it takes
such a long time as more than several weeks to achieve the Fermi level
equalization between the deposited organic layer from air and the thin
layers of metals [16].
The electronic energy levels of Ag nanoparticles are evaluated below.
When the average thickness of Ag was equal to or more than 10 nm,
deposited Ag atoms formed continuous layers. Since the continuous
layers exhibited their ionization energy of 4.58 eV on the average
without dependence on their thickness, they were attributed to Ag in
bulk in air. When their average thickness was less than 10 nm, deposited
Ag atoms formed isolated Ag nanoparticles, their ionization energy
increasing with decrease in the average thickness of deposited Ag layers.
The observed ionization energies of isolated Ag nanoparticles in
deposited Ag layers with average thickness of 0.3 nm, 1.0 nm, and 3.0
nm were 4.85 eV, 4.67 eV, and 4.63 eV, respectively, their deviation
from that of bulk Ag being 0.26 eV, 0.09 eV, and 0.05 eV, respectively.
According to Kubo, the deviation is the electric energy of a positive
charge in a nanoparticle with diameter of d after its ionization, and is
given by e2/d [24,25]. Then, the equivalent spherical diameter of isolated
nanoparticles in deposited Ag layers with average thickness of 0.3
nm, 1.0 nm, and 3.0 nm were estimated to be 5.5 nm, 16 nm, and 36 nm,
respectively.
The stability of latent image centers against oxidation has been discussed
below on the basis of the electronic energy levels of materials in
the NIT layers. It was estimated that the smallest latent image centers in
emulsions, which were free from gold sensitization, were composed of
4–5 Ag atoms [7]. Since the ionization energy of Ag nanoparticles was
estimated to be 4.85 eV when their diameter was 5.5 nm, exhibiting the
tendency to increase with decreasing their size, the ionization energy of
latent image centers should be larger than this value. Furthermore,
positively charged oxidants including a positive hole cannot attack a
latent image center with electric charge of +1/2 owing to the repulsive
force between them [7]. Since the Fermi level of the organic layers was
evaluated to be 􀀀 4.71 eV, it is difficult for O2 and other oxidizing gases
in air to oxidize latent image centers so rapidly and significantly as to
meet the decay of the centers, which is studied later in this paper.
The formation and characterization of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 have been initiated
by the PYSA measurement of the NIT layers. Fig. 3 shows the PYSA
spectra of the NIT layers with and without SS. The observed onset of
photo-electron yield in the lower energy region with about 4.5 eV could
be attributed to the photo-electron emission from Ag clusters, which
were photolytically formed before and during the PYSA measurement,
since its threshold energy was close to that of Ag nanoparticles as seen in
Fig. 2, and in addition, similar photo-electron emission was observed
before [13]. The photoelectrons in the higher energy region with about
5.6 eV as its threshold in the spectrum of the layer in the absence of SS
could be attributed to those from AgBrI grains, since similar PYSA
spectra were already observed for emulsion layers with AgBrI grains in
the NIT as shown in Fig. 2 [19]. However, the observed onset of
photoelectron yield in the higher energy region with 5.4–5.5 eV as its
threshold in the spectrum of the layer in the presence of SS could not be
attributed to those from AgBrI grains, but to those from the species
created by the addition of SS to the layer, since the addition of SS to the
layer increased the yield and shifted the threshold energy of the
photoelectron emission.
Then, as shown in Fig. 4, the PYSA measurement has been extended
to gelatin layers, to which aqueous solutions of SS and AgNO3 were
added before their coating. Since neither photo-electron yield from a
gelatin layer with SS nor that from a gelatin layer with AgNO3 was larger
than that from a gelatin layer itself, it was judged that neither SS nor
AgNO3 in a gelatin layer had electrons with binding energy of less than
Fig. 2. The electronic energy levels of materials in the NIT as measured by the
PYSA apparatus used in this study, where a closed circle and VB are an electron
and valence band, respectively. The highest occupied electronic energy level of
SS was situated below 􀀀 6 eV and could not be indicated in this figure. Fig. 3. PYSA spectra of the NIT without (a, ○) and with SS (b, ●).
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
5
6 eV. On the other hand, strong photo-electron emission was observed
with threshold at 5.4–5.5 eV from gelatin layers, to which both SS and
AgNO3 were added. It is known that SO32􀀀 ions and Ag+ ions form soluble
complex ions of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 in aqueous solutions, and dissolve silver
halide grains by forming Ag(SO3)2 3
􀀀 with Ag+ ions on the grain surface
[26]. It is therefore considered that the observed photo-electrons with
threshold energy of 5.4–5.5 eV in Fig. 4 were emitted from Ag(SO3)23􀀀 in
gelatin layers. As shown in Fig. 5, the photo-electron yield at the energy
of 6 eV increased with increase in the amount of AgNO3 added, supporting
the idea that the photo-electrons were emitted from Ag(SO3)23􀀀
in gelatin layers. The deviation from the proportionality indicates that
Ag+ ions tended to be captured by methionine residues in gelatin chains
[10] in prior to form complex ions with SO32􀀀 ions when the added
amount of Ag+ was small, and that Ag+ ions tended to form Ag(SO3)-
instead of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 when the amount of Ag+ ions was large.
It is considered that the photo-electrons as observed above were
emitted from Ag⁺ in Ag(SO₃)₂3‾ according to the following reasons. First
of all, an SO₃2‾ ion had not any electron with binding energy of less than
6 eV and is furthermore in contact with a positively charged ion in Ag
(SO₃)₂3‾. Secondly, it was observed that the binding energy of an electron
in Ag⁺ could be so small as to capture a positive hole in AgCl at low
temperature by forming a self-trapped positive hole with Ag2⁺, which
was closely surrounded by 6 Cl‾ in AgCl [7]. It is therefore considered
that the association of 2 SO₃2‾anions to Ag+ brought about the
photo-electron emission with threshold at 5.4–5.5 eV from Ag+ in a Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 complex ion in a gelatin layer.
Thus, the PYSA spectrum of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 made it possible to consider
its influence on the interaction between Br2 and Agn in the NIT. While
each spectrum in Fig. 3 was expressed by plotting the square root of
photo-electron yield as a function of photon energy, the intersection
between the straight line and the background line in the spectrum of Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 gave 5.7 eV as its vertical ionization energy in the potential
energy profile (Fig. 6). However, instead of vertical ionization energy,
adiabatic ionization energy of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 complex ions is important for
the consideration of the electron exchange of the complex ions with their
surroundings, and could be given as 5.4–5.5 eV by the energy, at which
photo-electrons just begun to appear in their spectrum as illustrated in
Fig. 6. These results are drawn in Fig. 2. As seen in this figure, an Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 ion could give an electron to Br2 on the grain surface to become
an Ag(SO3)22􀀀 when they encountered with each other there. Since the
electron affinity of an Ag(SO3)22􀀀 ion is larger than the ionization energy
of a latent image center Agn, it was probable for the former to oxidize
the latter after the former migrate in gelatin phase and encounter with
the latter in the presence of a plenty of Br􀀀 as follows; Agn + Ag(SO3)2 2
􀀀
+ Br􀀀 → Agn-1 + Ag(SO3)23􀀀 + AgBr. Furthermore, it is noted that an
SO₃2‾ ion itself does not have an ability to reduce a Br2 molecule
Fig. 4. PYSA spectra of gelatin layers without SS(a), with SS (b, c, d, and f), and
with AgNO3 (b, c, d, and e). In the small table in this figure, the column of SS
indicates the fraction of SS in weight % with respect to gelatin, and that of Ag
indicates the fraction of AgNO3 in weight % with respect to gelatin.
Fig. 5. Yield of photo-electrons emitted from Ag(SO3)23􀀀 by excitation light of
6 eV as a function of added amount of AgNO3 in gelatin layers, to which SS (2
wt %) was added. White circles in this figure correspond to the photo-electron
yield values in the curves of f, b, c, and d, respectively, at the energy of excitation
light of 6.0 eV.
Fig. 6. Potential energy profiles of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 at its ground state and ionized
state. Solid and broken arrows respectively indicate the electronic transitions
for vertical ionization and adiabatic one.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
6
according to the electronic energy diagram in Fig. 2, and that it does not
eliminate Br₂ irreversibly although it is usually called a halogen acceptor
in the field of photographic science.
3.2. Observation of decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers
We aim to record as many DM events as possible within the detector
in terms of the event search. It means a DM exposure period should be as
long as possible. The experimental period shall be around several
months. However, if the created latent image centers are decomposed
due to the recombination, the experimental period shall be limited due
to the decay constant of the latent image center. Therefore, we investigated
how the created latent image centers decay depending on the
presence of SS and temperature.
Fig. 7 shows the comparison in observed sensitivity between the NIT
layers, to which SS was introduced by the pre-mix method and by the dip
method. The vertical and horizontal axes of the figure correspond to the
quantities related to the sensitivity to alpha rays and gamma rays,
respectively. These were quantified using image analysis of scattered
light observed with an optical microscope in the emulsion layer after the
development. The observed values of sensitivity by the pre-mix method
seem to be bit higher with smaller fluctuation than those by the dip
method. Since SO32􀀀 ions tend to dissolve AgBrI grains by forming Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 ions with Ag+ ions on the grain surface, it is considered that the
dip method causes the Ostwald ripening and dissolution of the grains
more strongly than the pre-mix method, enhancing the sensitivity
decrease and fluctuation. The observations and analyses of the decay of
latent image centers in the NIT layers under various conditions were
made by the pre-mix method and described below.
Fig. 8 shows the decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers
without SS, which were formed by α ray and γ ray irradiation and kept at
different temperature in air. As seen in this figure, the number of latent
image centers formed by γrays decreased up to about 1/5 after the
emulsion layers were kept for more than 30 days. The results shown in
Fig. 8 indicates that 1/5 latent image centers could survive and that
gelatin could protect about 1/5 of total latent image centers against the
reverse reaction in the NIT layers. However, the decay rate of latent
image centers depended on experimental conditions. Fig. 8 shows that
the decay rate of the latent image centers in the absence of SS formed by
α rays was smaller than that of the centers formed by γ rays. Since it is
predicted that α and γ rays create about 1000–2000 and 100–200
electron-hole pairs per grain, respectively, it is considered that the
number of Ag atoms in each latent image center formed by α ray irradiation
is larger by about 10 times than that in each center formed by
γray irradiation. A latent image center Agn loses its activity when it
becomes to be Ag3 after the repetition of its reverse reaction with Br2. It
is therefore considered that the decay rate of latent image centers decreases
with increase in the size of the centers. This consideration is in
accord with the above observation that the decay rate of latent image
centers formed by γ ray irradiation was larger by about 7 times than that
of the centers formed by αray irradiation.
The reverse reaction studied here is the essential process for solarization
with similar temperature dependence [27]. As seen in Fig. 8, the
decay rate at low temperature was smaller than that at high temperature,
and the observed values of the half-life (t1/2) of latent image centers
formed by γ rays at 16 ◦C (289 K) and 􀀀 15 ◦C (258 K), were 3.8 days and
38 days, respectively. The rate constant of the decay of latent image
centers is reciprocally proportional to t1/2, and is given by Aexp(-Ea/RT),
where A, Ea, R, and T are constant, activation energy, gas constant, and
absolute temperature. The value of Ea was given to be 4.8 kcal/mol by
applying the above-stated experimental result to the equation, and was
attributed to the activation energy of the diffusion of Br2 in gelatin
phase.
Fig. 9 shows the decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers
without and with SS when the centers were formed by α ray andγ ray
irradiations and kept at different temperatures in air. As seen in this
figure, the decay of the centers formed by γ ray irradiation was faster
than that of the centers formed by αray irradiation, confirming that the
size of latent image centers formed by γ ray irradiation was smaller than
that of the centers formed by α ray irradiation. In both cases, it was also
confirmed that the lowering of the storage temperature to keep irradiated
emulsion layers before development could significantly decrease
the decay rate of the centers, and was therefore useful to improve the
performance of the NIT. In every case, it was found that the addition of
SS to emulsion layers could decrease the decay rate of latent image
centers, and should be therefore expected to improve the performance of
the NIT. By taking into account the fact that, in addition to SS, gelatin is
also a halogen acceptor, the mechanisms of the effects of SS and gelatin
on the reverse reaction are discussed below.
As observed in the former paper [13], the reverse reaction of
irradiation-created Br2 with latent image centers in dried emulsion
layers having AgBrI grains, in which gelatin was immobile, could be
irreversibly depressed by gelatin, unless the volume ratio of gelatin in
emulsion layers was reduced to excess. According to Berg and Keller
[28], most latent image centers on AgBr grains were destroyed by
irradiation-created Br2 even in the presence of gelatin in hydrosol of
AgBr grains, where gelatin was mobile, although the rate of the
destruction could be significantly reduced by gelatin. It is known that a
methionine residue in a gelatin chain acting as Lewis base reacts with
Br2 acting as a Lewis acid to form a halogen bond. However, the halogen
bond formation is reversible, and a Br2 molecule, which is involved in
the halogen bond, still keeps its ability to react with an Agn to form
2AgBr.
According to the electronic energy levels of components in the NIT as
seen in Fig. 2, the electron affinity of Br2 on AgBrI grains is slightly larger
than the ionization energy of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 .. It is therefore considered that
the electron transfer from Ag(SO3)23􀀀 . to Br2 takes place to form Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 , which can move in gelatin phase and arrive at a latent image
center Agn to oxidize it. Since the reaction of Br2 with Agn was faster
than that of Ag(SO3)22􀀀 with Agn, it is considered that the mobility of Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 in gelatin phase was smaller than that of Br2. Emulsion layers
are composed of AgBrI grains suspended in gelatin with loose network of
its chains, through which small molecules and ions can migrate [29].
Gelatin chains are composed of various kinds of amino acid residues,
many of which are dissociated to have electric charges and thus reduces
the mobility of ionic species owing to attractive interaction between
them. It is known that non-ionized species diffuse more rapidly than the
Fig. 7. Comparison in sensitivity between the NIT layers, to which SS was
introduced by pre-mix method and by the dip method.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
7
ionized species of similar size in gelatin layers [30]. It is considered from
this viewpoint that the mobility of Br2 in gelatin phase should be larger
than that of Ag(SO3)22􀀀 , since Br2 is non-ionized, and smaller than an Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 ion.
Among amino acid residues in gelatin, only methionine residue is a
soft Lewis base and capable of reducing the mobility of such a Lewis acid
as Br2 by forming a halogen bond between them. However, the occupancy
of methionine residues in gelatin is only 0.4% [11]. It is therefore
considered that an Ag(SO3)2 2
􀀀 ion has smaller mobility with larger
activation energy for its diffusion than a Br2 molecule, and could thus
make the time for the reverse reaction so long as stated above. In
addition, nuclear recoils of the WIMP are predicted to create as many as
1000–2000 electron-hole pairs, and should therefore form large latent
image centers with slow decay rate. Thus, it is considered from the
above-stated results and analyses that the rate of the reverse reaction
between Agn and Br2 could be reduced to make the NIT layers available
for DM detection when they would contain sufficient amount of SS and
were kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦C ~ 􀀀 50 ◦C) before development. It
is however probable that the reverse reaction would appear to destroy
Agn under some unexpected conditions.
While the reaction between methionine residue and Br2 is reversible,
methionine residue in gelatin chain can immobilize Br2 in emulsion
layers with large volume fraction of gelatin, since Br2 bound by such a
long chain as gelatin is hardly mobile in the layers. However, many
irradiation-created Br2 molecules can mobile and arrive at Agn in
emulsion layers when the volume fraction of gelatin in emulsion layers is
so small that the concentration of methionine residues in gelatin phase is
not enough to capture most Br2 molecules or when the concentration of
irradiation-created Br2 is so large that many Br2 molecules can escape
from methionine residues in gelatin phase.
3.3. Depression of reverse reaction between Agn and Br2
It has been found from the above-stated examination that the reverse
reaction between Agn and irradiation-created Br2 is especially severe in
the NIT and has not been fully overcome at the present. Then, considerations
are made on ideas to cause further depression of the reverse
reaction between Agn and Br2 according to the knowledge obtained in
this study and reported in literature [7,13,31,32]. The methods to
irreversibly remove Br2 on the surface of AgBrI grains in emulsion layers
include reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and
2-electron sensitization [7,31]. Reduction sensitization centers are
composed of Ag2 at neutral kink sites on the surface of AgBrI grains, and
usually formed by weakly reducing the grains. However, reduction
sensitization is not compatible to S + Au sensitization, which is usually
used for highly sensitive photographic emulsions including nuclear
emulsions for the OPERA experiment, since gold sensitization tends to
make Ag2 a fog center [7]. Fortunately, the NIT are free from gold
sensitization, and therefore afford reduction sensitization. Hydrogen
hypersensitization is carried out by keeping emulsion layers in hydrogen
gas after evacuation for weak reduction of the surface of AgBrI grains in
the layers [32]. Although hydrogen hypersensitization is compatible to
Fig. 8. The degree of the decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers without SS, both of which were irradiated by α rays (left-hand side) and by γ rays (right-hand
side), and kept in air for time period described on the abscissa at temperature indicated in the figures.
Fig. 9. The decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers without and with SS in air at temperature indicated in the figures. The results with latent image centers,
which were formed by α ray and γ ray irradiations, were shown by solid and broken lines, respectively.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
8
S + Au sensitization, it forms the centers composed of Ag2 at negatively
charged kink sites, which are not stable for a long time in air [7]. While
the mechanism of 2-electron sensitization is similar to that of reduction
sensitization, it has been designed to be compatible to S + Au sensitization
by replacing Ag2 with a special organic compound [31]. Neither
reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, nor 2-electron
sensitization has ever been examined for nuclear emulsions in the past.
Another way to depress the reverse reaction between Agn and
irradiation-created Br2 is to decrease its rate further. This way should be
achieved by decreasing the mobility of such medium species as Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 in gelatin phase and by increasing the size of Agn. Ways to
achieve the former include the lowering of the temperature for keeping
irradiated emulsion layers before development, and the increase of the
size and electric charges of medium species. Ways to achieve the latter,
to increase the size of Agn include the increase in the number of electronhole
pairs per grain by irradiation, and increase in the efficiency of the
formation and growth of latent image centers Agn. While a way to increase
the number of electron-hole pairs per grain is to increase the size
of the grains, it is likely to suffer from the reduction in the read-out
efficiency of developed grains. Ways to increase the efficiency of formation
and growth of Agn are to depress two kinds of recombination;
direct recombination between free electrons and free positive holes and
reverse reaction between Agn and irradiation-created Br2. Direct
recombination could be depressed by introducing the traps for electrons
and positive holes [3,7]. In silver halide grains, traps for electrons and
positive holes are usually crystal defects and impurities, respectively
[8]. Crystal defects includes dislocations and silver ions at kink sites on
the grain surfaces. Impurities includes iodide ions in AgBrI grains, and is
expected to be improved by increasing the concentration of iodide ions
or by localizing them within the core portion of the grains. Effective
ways to depress the reverse reaction between Agn and Br2 are such
irreversible treatments as reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization,
and 2-electron sensitization, as stated above.
4. Summary
Following the previous study [3], which characterized DM event in
super-fine-grained nuclear emulsions by direct recombination and
reverse reaction between the products of ionic relaxation (i.e., Agn and
Br2), the present study was made on the latter by placing its focus on the
performance of a typical halogen acceptor Na2SO3 (SS), which is used to
enhance the sensitivity of the emulsions and is therefore expected to
influence the reverse reaction. By means of PYSA, it has been revealed
that Ag(SO3)23􀀀 took a place of Br2 for the reverse reaction by giving an
electron to Br2 and remarkably reduce the rate of the reverse reaction,
although Na2SO3 by itself could not irreversibly remove the reverse
reaction. Discussions have been made on ideas to cause further
depression and irreversible removal of the reverse reaction, including
reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and 2-electron
sensitization.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Tadaaki Tani: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Takashi Asada: Writing – review &
editing, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation. Takayuki Uchida: Writing – review & editing, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Tatsuhiro Naka: Writing
– review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number JP18H03699 and JP19H05806.
References
[1] T.M. Undagoltla, Rauch Ludwig, Dark matter direct-detection experiments, J. Phys.
G: Nucl. Part, Phys. 43 (2016) 013001.
[2] T. Naka, T. Asada, T. Katsuragawa, K. Hakamata, M. Yoshimoto, K. Kuwabara,
M. Nakamura, O. Sato, T. Nakano, Y. Tawara, G. De Lellis, C. Sirignano,
N. D’Ambrossio, Fine grained nuclear emulsion for higher resolution tracking
detector, Nuclear Inst, Methods in Physical Research A 718 (2013) 519–521.
[3] T. Tani, T. Naka, Dark matter event in nuclear emulsions: comparative analysis by
time-resolved photoconductivity of silver halide grains, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. A 1046 (2023) 167633.
[4] T. Asada, T. Naka, K. Kuwabara, M. Yoshimoto, The development of a super-finegrained
nuclear emulsion, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2017 (2017) 063H01, https://
doi.org/10.1093/ptep/ptx076.
[5] T. Shiraishi, S. Akamatsu, T. Naka, T. Asada, G. De Lellis, V. Tioukov, G. Rosa,
R. Kobayashi, N. Ambrosio, A. Alexandrov, O. Sato, Environmental sub-MeV
neutron measurement at the Gran Sasso surface laboratory with a super-finegrained
nuclear emulsion detector, Phys. Rev. C 107 (2023) 014608.
[6] S. Sala, A. Ariga, A. Ereditato, M. Giammarchi, M. Leone, C. Pistillo, P. Scampoli,
First demonstration of antimatter wave interferometry, Sci. Adv. 5 (2019) eaav
7610.
[7] T. Tani, Photographic Science Advances in Nanoparticles, J-Aggregates, Dye
Sensitization, and Organic Devices, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
[8] W. Schottky, W.T. Read Jr., Statistics of the recombination of holes and electrons,
Phys. Rev. 87 (1952) 835.
[9] T. Toshito, K. Kodama, L. Sihver, K. Yusa, M. Ozaki, K. Amako, S. Kameoka,
K. Murakami, T. Sasaki, S. Aoki, T. Ban, T. Fukuda, M. Komatsu, H. Kubota,
N. Naganawa, T. Nakamura, T. Nakano, M. Natsume, K. Niwa, S. Takahashi,
J. Yoshida, H. Yoshida, M. Nakazawa, N. Kanematsu, M. Komori, S. Sato, M. Asai,
T. Koi, C. Fukushima, S. Ogawa, M. Shibasaki, H. Shibuya, Measurements of total
and partial charge-changing cross sections for 200- to 400-MeV/nucleon 12C on
water and polycarbonate, Phys. Rev. C75 (2007) 054606.
[10] J.E. Maskasky, A comparison of oxidized and nonoxidized gelatins. I. Silver ion
binding, J. Imag. Sci. 33 (1989) 10–13.
[11] P.I. Rose, Gelatin I. General properties, in: T.H. James (Ed.), The Theory of the
Photographic Process, fourth ed., Macmillan, New York, 1977, pp. 51–67.
[12] Akira Nishio, Kunihiro Morishima, Ken-ichi Kuwabara, Tetsuo Yoshida,
Takeshi Funakubo, Nobuko Kitagawa, Mitsuaki Kuno, Yuta Manabe,
Mitsuhiro Nakamura, Nuclear emulsion with excellent long-term stability
developed for cosmic-ray imaging, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 966 (2020)
163850.
[13] T. Tani, A. Nishio, T. Uchida, K. Morishima, Track formation in nuclear plates for
cosmic-ray imaging with stabilized Ag nanoparticles, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.
Res. A 1006 (2021) 165427.
[14] K. Alan Yamakawa, Silver bromide crystal counters, Phys. Rev. 82 (1951) 522–526.
[15] Y. Nakajima, M. Hoshino, D. Yamashita, M. Uda, Near edge structures of Mg-, Co-,
Cu-, and Zn-tetraphenylporphyrins measured by PESA and calculated with DV-Xα,
Adv. Quant. Chem. 42 (2003) 399–405.
[16] T. Tani, R. Kan, Y. Yamano, T. Uchida, Stabilization of Ag nanostructures by tuning
their Fermi levels, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 57 (2018) 055001.
[17] H. Ishii, K. Seki, Energy level alignment at organic-metal interfaces, in: W.
R. Salaneck, K. Seki, A. Kahn, J.-J. Pireaux (Eds.), Conjugated Polymer and
Molecular Interfaces Science and Technology for Photonic and Optoelectronic
Applications, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, Basel, 2001, pp. 293–349.
[18] K. Siegbahn, C. Nordling, A. Fahlman, R. Nordberg, K. Hamrin, J. Hedman,
G. Johansson, T. Bergmark, S.-E. Karlsson, I. Lindgren, B. Lindgren, Atomic Esca,
Molecular and Solid State Structure Studied by Means of Electron Spectroscopy,
Almqvist & Wiksells Bpktryckeri AB, Uppsala, 1967.
[19] T. Tani, T. Uchida, T. Naka, Analyses and design of nuclear emulsions for dark
matter detection, Radiat. Meas. 129 (2019) 106184.
[20] T. Tani, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Nishimi, T. Uchida, A. Kudo, Examination of
photocatalytic Z-scheme for overall water splitting with its electronic structure,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 25 (2023) 11418–11428, https://doi.org/10.1039/
D3CP00241A.
[21] M. Svanqvist, K. Hansen, Non-jellium scaling of metal cluster ionization energies
and electron affinity, Eur. Phys. J. D 56 (2010) 199–203.
[22] K. Rademann, B. Kaiser, U. Uven, F. Hensel, Size dependence of the gradual
transition to metallic properties in isolated mercury clusters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59
(1987) 2319–2321.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
9
[23] T. Tani, T. Uchida, Studies on electronic structure of interfaces between Ag and
gelatin for stabilization of Ag nanoparticles, J. J. Appl. Phys. 54 (2015) 065001.
[24] R. Kubo, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 17 (1962) 975–986.
[25] R. Kubo, Ultra-fine particles. Editorial Board on Ultra-Fine Particles, AGNE Gijutsu
Center, Tokyo, 1984, pp. 4–10 (in Japanese).
[26] J. Pouradier, A. Pailliotet, C. R. Berry, Properties of silver halides I. Structure and
thermodynamic properties, in: Ref.18, pp.1-12.
[27] P.J. Hillson, E.A. Sutherns, Latent-image effect involving reversal or
desensitization, in: C.E.K. Mees, T.H. James (Eds.), The Theory of the Photographic
Process, third ed., Macmillan, New York, 1966 (Chapter 8).
[28] W.F. Berg, H. Keller, Latent-image fading and the function of gelatin in the silver
halide System, Photogr. Sci. Eng. 11 (1967) 178–180.
[29] J.E. Jolly, Photogr, Sci. Eng. 14 (1970) 169–177.
[30] T. H. James, The rate of development I. General kinetics of negative image
development, in: Ref.18, pp.404-429.
[31] I.R. Gould, J.R. Lenhard, A.A. Muenter, S.A. Godleski, S. Farid, Two-electron
sensitization: a new concept for silver halide photography, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122
(2000) 11934–11943.
[32] T.A. Babcock, M.H. Sewell, W.C. Lewis, T.H. James, Hypersensitization of
Spectroscopic Films and Plates Using Hydrogen Gas, vol. 79, 1974, p. 1479.
=======
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A 1063 (2024) 169303
Available online 31 March 2024
0168-9002/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Dark matter event in nuclear emulsions II: Ionic relaxation
and recombination
Tadaaki Tani a,*, Takashi Asada b, Takayuki Uchida c, Tatsuhiro Naka d,e
a Soc. Photogr. Imaging Jpn., 2933-2, Yoshidajima, Kaisei-machi, Ashigarakami-gun, Kanagawa, 258-0021, Japan
b Department of Physics, University of Naples Fererico II, Complesso Universitario di Monte Sant’Angelo-Via Cinthia, 21, 80126, Napoli, Italy
c Graduate School of Engineering, Tokyo Polytechnic University, 1583, Atsugi, Kanagawa, 243-0297, Japan
d Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Toho University, Miyama, Funabashi, 274-8501, Japan
e Kobayashi-Masukawa Institute, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Dark matter
Nuclear emulsion
Silver halide grain
Recombination
Ionic relaxation
A B S T R A C T
The previous paper has indicated that it is important to depress both direct recombination and reverse reaction
between ionic relaxation products, i.e., latent image centers (Agn) and Br2 for dark matter (DM) detection by a
super-fine-grained nuclear emulsion named NIT. This paper describes the results of the analyses on the reverse
reaction in the NIT containing a typical halogen acceptor Na2SO3 (SS), which is used to make the NIT sensitive.
The electronic structure of the NIT layer containing SS as measured by means of photo-electron yield spectroscopy
in air revealed that Ag(SO3)23􀀀 was formed in emulsions and could become to be Ag(SO3)22􀀀 by giving an
electron to Br2. Although SS could not stop the reverse reaction, SS made it so slow that SS could make the NIT
with SS available for DM detection when the irradiated NIT layers were kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦C to
􀀀 50 ◦C) in order to bring about further slowdown of the reaction rate. It is thought that Ag(SO3)22􀀀 took a place of
Br2 for the reverse reaction and decreased its rate, since the diffusion of Ag(SO3)22􀀀 , which is electrically charged
and large in size, is slower than that of Br2 owing to attractive interaction between Ag(SO3)22􀀀 and many ionized
substituents in gelatin. Discussions are made on ideas to depress further the reverse reaction.
1. Introduction
Dark matter (DM) is one of the most interesting and important subjects
to be solved in cosmology and astronomy, and has not yet been
determined until now. It is widely assumed that undefined elementary
particles (e.g., Weakly Interacting Massive Particles or WIMPs) are the
constituents of DM. We are advancing plans to detect the WIMPs using
experimental methods, and aim to detect the recoil of nucleus caused by
WIMPs coming against the direction of our Solar System within the
Milky Way under a low-background environment.
A variety of experiments have been developed over recent decades,
aiming to detect these particles via their elastic interaction in a detector
medium [1]. A possible detector to distinguish such recoil events from
other radiation background events is a track detector with directional
sensitivity. As such a detector, we utilize a solid-state track detector
named Nano Image Tracker (NIT), a dedicated nuclear emulsion with a
spatial resolution better than a few hundred nanometers [2,3]. The NIT
was developed by forming AgBr0.96I0.04 grains (denoted AgBrI grains in
this paper) with about 40 nm and 70 nm in equivalent spherical diameter
to meet the predicted track length of the nuclear recoils [4].
While this detector has been proven to detect the tracks of slow ions,
we are currently focused on understanding this phenomenon from the
perspective of photographic science. Recently, its applications have
expanded beyond its original purpose of dark matter detection, e.g.,
neutron measurement [5] and quantum diffraction imaging [6], owing
to its high special resolution. This diversification of use underscores the
growing importance of fundamentally understanding the detector.
The fundamental knowledge of photographic processes is briefly
summarized below [7]. Silver halide (AgX) grains in the photographic
emulsion layer undergo electron-hole pair creation due to photoexcitation
or ionization. An electron is captured by a site with electric charge
of +1/2 such as a silver ion at a kink site on the grain surface (electronic
process). Then, the captured electron attracts and reacts with an interstitial
silver ion to form a silver atom on the site (ionic process). A latent
image center is composed of a silver cluster and is formed by the
alternate repetition of electronic and ionic processes at the same site
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tadaakitani@mbr.nifty.com (T. Tani).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nima
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2024.169303
Received 18 August 2023; Received in revised form 21 February 2024; Accepted 30 March 2024
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
2
with electric charge of +1/2 after changing its charge between 􀀀 1/2
and + 1/2. Among AgX grains, only the grain with one or more latent
image centers on its surface contribute to the formation of a silver grain.
It has been estimated that the smallest latent image center is composed
of 4–5 silver atoms in such emulsions as the NIT, which are not
gold-sensitized [7].
Latent image formation is counteracted by recombination processes
between electrons and positive holes. In the previous paper, we have
characterized the DM event in the NIT, and revealed that three kinds of
recombination processes are taking place as illustrated in Fig. 1 [3]. One
of them is the direct recombination between free electrons and free
positive holes, which takes place in the time range from about 100 fs to
about 20 ns. Electrons and positive holes, which have escaped from the
direct recombination, are captured by electron traps and positive hole
traps, respectively, and facing with indirect recombination of trapped
electrons with free positive holes and that of trapped positive holes with
free electrons [8], respectively. However, ionic conductivity is overwhelmingly
larger than electronic one in AgX grains in a dark environment,
resulting in the occurrence of ionic relaxation processes in
prior to indirect recombination ones [7]. Thus, most trapped electrons
react with interstitial silver ions to form Agn, while most trapped positive
holes react with silver ion vacancies to form Br2. It is noted that Br2
molecules are deactivated by gelatin when gelatin is present in abundance.
The other recombination process is the reverse reaction between
latent image centers Agn and irradiation-created Br2, and essentially
important for DM detection by the NIT, as described below.
The essential property of the NIT for DM detection in terms of the
above-stated reverse reaction could be made clear by comparing the
characteristics among the four typical emulsions with AgBrI grains as
sensors. They are emulsions for DM detection, minimum ionizing particle
(MIP) detection (e.g., for OPERA experiment), radiation therapy
[9], and picture-taking. Table 1 shows the results of the collection and
analysis of the knowledge on the characteristics of the above-stated four
emulsions. As shown in this table, the amount of irradiation-created Br2
with respect to the amount of gelatin in the NIT for DM detection is
estimated to be extremely large among them, indicating the concern that
the latent image formation in the NIT should tend to seriously suffer
from the reverse reaction between latent image centers and Br2 from the
viewpoint of the fact that the ability of gelatin to deactivate Br2 is
limited. This problem comes from the following reasons. In order to
meet predicted track length of a nuclear recoil of a WIMP, the NIT were
designed to make AgBrI grains the smallest and most abundant in
number among the four AgBrI systems. While each grain creates photoelectrons
in it to form a latent image center composed of Agn, the same
number of positive holes are created in it to form Br2 molecules. Since
the grain concentration in the NIT is the highest among the four emulsion
layers, the concentration of irradiation-created Br2 associated with
latent image formation is the highest in the NIT.
In addition, the number of electron-hole pairs per grain created by a
nuclear recoil of a WIMP is estimated to be much larger than those
created by irradiation in the emulsions for MIP detection and picturetaking.
It was estimated that the smallest latent image center was
composed of Ag4 or Ag5 and Ag2Au in S-sensitized and S + Au-sensitized
emulsions, respectively [7]. It was also evaluated that about 10
electron-hole pairs per grain were needed to form a latent image center
on an AgBrI grain in a fully S + Au-sensitized emulsion for picture-taking
[7], and about 30 electron-hole pairs in an S + Au-sensitized AgBrI grain
with about 200 nm in diameter in an OPERA emulsion, in which a
neutrino-induced high energy particle (i.e., MIP) forms 15–30
electron-hole pairs per grain. It is noted that the number of electron-hole
pairs per grain created by photoexcitation for picture-taking and that by
ionization for the OPERA experiment are comparable to those needed
for latent image formation in the corresponding emulsions to give
optimized results. On the other hand, it is predicted that the number of
electron-hole pairs in an AgBrI grain with about 70 nm in diameter
created by a nuclear recoil of the WIMP in the NIT is as many as 1800,
being much larger than that needed for the formation of a latent image
center on each grain in S + Au-sensitized emulsions. However, positive
holes with the same large number are at the same time formed in the
grain, and should be deactivated to keep latent image centers from being
attacked by Br2, which are formed by irradiation-created positive holes.
It is known that Br2 could be deactivated by gelatin with methionine
residues as active sites [10] in emulsions for picture-taking. However, it
is concerned that gelatin can’t deactivate Br2 well in the case of DM
detection, since the ratio of the amount of irradiation-created Br2 with
respect to that of gelatin in the NIT layer is extremely large, and the
population of methionine residues in gelatin is as small as 0.4 % [11]. It
is therefore considered from the above-stated analyses that the most
important subject for the latent image formation in the NIT for DM
detection is, not the depression of the indirect recombination process (2
in Fig. 1) by S + Au sensitization centers, which is the most important in
highly sensitive emulsions for picture-taking and in the OPERA emulsion
for MIP detection, but the depression of the reverse reaction process
between latent image centers (Agn) and irradiation-created Br2 (3 in
Fig. 1).
As summarized in Table 1, Agn in usual photographic films could
survive against the reverse reaction owing to the deactivation of Br2 by
abundant gelatin with methionine residues as active sites. In nuclear
emulsions, gelatin cannot protect Agn sufficiently against the reverse
reaction owing to the fact that the volume fraction of gelatin in nuclear
emulsions is much smaller than that in usual photographic emulsions.
The reverse reaction between latent image centers and Br2 was observed
[12] and analyzed in nuclear emulsions for cosmic ray imaging [13]. In
addition, the amount of irradiation-created Br2 with respect to the
amount of gelatin is the largest in the NIT for DM detection. In order to
overcome this problem, sodium sulfite (SS), which is regarded as a
typical halogen acceptor (i.e., a compound with ability to deactivate a
halogen molecule) in AgX photography, is added to the NIT to enhance
their sensitivity to nuclear recoils of the WIMPs instead of using
sulfur-plus-gold (S + Au) sensitization. However, the performance of SS
in the NIT has not been analyzed until now. Thus, we have focused our
study on the effect of SS on the reverse reaction between Agn and Br2 to
make clear its performance in the NIT.
In order to study the reaction between Agn and Br2 in the NIT in the
presence of SS, it is necessary to know their electronic structure
composed of the electronic energy levels of AgBrI grains, Agn, Br2, SS,
complex ions of SS with Ag+ in gelatin phase, and the organic layers,
which are deposited on the surfaces of samples from air containing
various gases and floating organic substances as described later. In this
paper, we have prepared multiple NIT samples and measured the
Fig. 1. Three kinds of recombination processes taking place in AgBrI grains [1;
direct recombination process between free electrons and free positive holes, 2
and 2’; indirect recombination processes between trapped electrons and free
positive holes and between trapped positive holes and free electrons, respectively,
3; reverse reaction between Agn and Br2 formed through ionic relaxation
processes], where ● and ○ are an electron and a positive hole, respectively, CB
and VB are conduction and valence bands, respectively, and Ag⚪+
and Ag◻- are
an interstitial silver ion and a silver ion vacancy, respectively.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
3
electronic energy levels of these materials by means of an apparatus of
photo-electron yield spectroscopy in air (PYSA). It involves illuminating
the sample with ultraviolet light in air and measuring the relationship
between the energy of the photons and the photoelectron yield, determining
the electronic energy levels of substances in the sample. Hence,
understanding the reverse reaction, it has been revealed that the reaction
process of irradiation-created Agn and Br2, is crucial for controlling
the NIT’s performance.
2. Samples and experiments
The samples, which were subjected to the PYSA measurement, were
NIT layers with or without SS, dried layers of gelatin solutions, to which
SS and/or AgNO3 solutions were added, thin layers of Ag, and Ag
nanoparticles. The NIT layer contained AgBrI grains (about 70 nm in
equivalent spherical diameter) [4] as sensors. The grains occupied 35%
in volume of the dried emulsion layer. SS was introduced into the
emulsion layer by adding its aqueous solution to the NIT emulsion
before coating (pre-mix method) or by dipping the NIT layer in an
aqueous solution of SS (dip method). By use of the above-stated samples,
the PYSA was used to measure the electronic energy levels of AgBrI and
SS in the NIT, those of SS and AgNO3 in gelatin layers, and those of silver
particles with varied size.
In order to get fundamental aspects of the reverse processes, the NIT
layers with and without SS were irradiated by αrays and γ rays of 241Am
source. C ion beams have been considered to use for the simulation of
DM detection experiments since C ions are expected to be the most
abundant among probable nuclear recoils of WIMPs in the NIT layers
composed of elements such as Ag, Br, I, H, N, and O ions. However, it
was difficult to use C ion beams for the purpose of this study owing to the
fact that the penetration depth of C ion beams in emulsion layers was
estimated to be too short to get accurate experimental results. Therefore,
in this experiment, alpha rays that generate a similar number of
electron-hole pairs per grain were used as a substitute for C ion beam,
and also as a target for comparison with gamma rays to get the dependence
of the reverse reaction on the number of electron-hole pairs per
grain. The number of electron-hole pairs created by irradiation in an
AgBrI grain with 70 nm in diameter was estimated to be 1000–2000 for a
nuclear recoil induced by WIMPs and α-rays, and 100–200 for γray on
the basis of the fact that an electron-hole pair was formed by the
deposited energy of 5.8 eV in AgBr [14].
The NIT were irradiated and kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦C ~
-50 ◦C) in air before development for the simulation of the DM detection
experiment, and were subjected to their storage under conditions with
varied temperature and time period before they were subjected to
development for the observation of the change in the amount of latent
image centers during the storage. Photographic development process
was made at 5 ◦C for 10 min by use of MAA developer [4]. The readout of
developed Ag grains was made under an epi-illuminate optical microscope
by observing scattered light of the localized surface plasmon
resonance in each grain.
The decay of latent image centers, which were formed by the irradiation
of αand γrays to emulsion layers at room temperature (15 ◦C),
was given by the ratio of the number of latent image centers observed
just after the irradiation to that observed after the irradiated layer was
kept for a time period t under a certain condition, and was called relative
sensitivity in this paper. While the relative number of latent image
centers created by α rays was given by the average brightness of the
scattered light from developed Ag grains in nuclear tracks, the number
of latent image centers created by γ rays was given by the number of
light spots scattered from developed Ag grains in the layer.
The electronic energy levels of various materials in the NIT were
measured by means of PYSA [15] with an apparatus (Riken Keiki, AC-2),
which can detect electrons with binding energy of less than 6 eV.
Photo-electrons were observed weakly from gelatin layers in the energy
range with slightly less than 6 eV in binding energy, and were attributed
to the organic layers deposited from air on their surfaces [16]. It is
known that organic substances are always floating in air and are being
deposited on sample surfaces as was revealed by observing the Fermi
levels of thin metal layers, which were changing in air with time after
their preparation [16]. The deposited organic layers influence the
physical properties of samples and in particular change the Fermi levels
of metals through the pinning of their Fermi levels [16] and the
push-back effect [17]. As the evidence for the deposition of organic
substances from air on sample surfaces, the photoelectron emission from
C 1s orbitals is always observed in the X-ray photoelectron spectra of the
samples, which do not contain carbon atoms [18]. The electronic energy
level of the valence band maximum at the surfaces of AgBrI grains in the
NIT layer was given by the observed threshold energy of the PYSA
spectra of the grains in the layer [19]. As reference experiments, gelatin
layers, to which aqueous solutions of SS and/or AgNO3 were added
before coating, were subjected to PYSA measurements.
The electronic energy levels of latent image centers composed of Agn
were evaluated by measuring and analyzing PYSA spectra of thin layers
of Ag, which were vacuum-deposited on glass plates, and became to be
isolated nanoparticles when the average thickness of evaporated Ag
layers was less than 10 nm [20]. When the electronic energy difference
between Fermi level and the vacuum level is F, the ionization energy (I)
and electron affinity (EA) of metal nanoparticles with diameter of d are
F + E, and F – E, respectively, where E is a function of 1/d [21,22]. Since
latent image centers are composed of very small Ag clusters, their
electronic structures should differ from those of Ag in bulk. Then, a
study has been made on the size-dependent electronic energy levels of
Ag nanoparticles deposited on glass plates by means of the PYSA
apparatus.
The influence of air on the electronic energy levels of materials
concerned was judged by the Fermi level of the organic layers deposited
on them. The Fermi levels of the organic layers were evaluated by
observing the equalization of Fermi levels of the organic layers with such
metal layers as Ag, Au, and Pt, whose Fermi levels in vacuum are well
known and are so diversified as 􀀀 4.3 eV, 􀀀 5.1 eV, and 􀀀 5.65 eV,
respectively [17].
3. Results and discussions
3.1. Electronic energy levels of materials in AgBrI emulsion layers
In order to analyze the reverse reaction between latent image centers
Table 1
Characterization of typical detectors with AgBrI grains as sensors.
Purpose DM detection MIP detection Rad. Therapy Taking picture
Excitation source Heavy particle (low velocity) MIP Heavy particle (high velocity) Visible light
Size of grains (track length) ~70 nm (<1 μm) ~200 nm (<1 mm) ~200 nm ~1000 nm
No. of chem. sens. centers ~30/grain ~300/grain ~300/grain ~7500/grain
No. of e-h+pairs (irrad. time) 1000-2000 /grain (100 fs) ~30/grain (1 fs) >5000/grain ≧10/grain (1 ms)
Volume ratio of gelatin 65% 45–70% ~70% 80–90%
No. of Br2/cm3 ~5╳1018 0.5–4╳1015 5╳1017~ 2-5╳1012~
Ways for sensitization Dense traps
Br2 depression
Au + S sensitization Au + S sensitization Au + S sensitization
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
4
and irradiation-created Br2 molecules taking place in the NIT for DM
detection, it is necessary to get the knowledge of the electronic energy
levels of the materials in relation to this phenomenon. They are AgBr
grain, Br2 on the grain surface, silver cluster and silver in bulk state,
organic layer deposited from air, and Ag(SO3)23􀀀 , which is formed in the
emulsion owing to the reaction between Ag+ and SO3􀀀 . In the subsequent
paragraphs of this subsection, we explain how we determined their
electronic energy levels.
The electronic energy levels of materials in the NIT, which have been
made through the experiments described later, are shown in Fig. 2. Since
gelatin is used as a binder for the NIT, it is considered that the electronic
energy levels of materials in a gelatin layer are the same as those in the
NIT layer. The threshold energy of the PYSA spectra of AgBrI grains in
nuclear emulsions indicated that the energy difference between the top
of the valence band of the grains and the vacuum level was about 5.6 eV
[19]. It is therefore considered that the electron affinity (EA) of Br2 on
the grain surface is about 5.6 eV, since Br2 is formed by the ionic
relaxation of positive holes trapped on the grain surface.
Organic layers deposited from air on samples are characterized
below. It is known that organic materials together with various gases in
air are deposited on the surfaces of samples to form organic layers [16].
It is considered that samples are oxidized when the Fermi level of the
samples is higher than that of the deposited organic layers from air,
causing the electron transfer for the Fermi level equalization between
them. Thus, the Fermi level of the deposited organic layers from air was
estimated by measuring the electronic structures of the interfaces between
the organic layers and various metals, whose Fermi levels in
vacuum were well known. While the Fermi levels of clean Ag, Au, and Pt
in vacuum were largely diversified to be 􀀀 4.3 eV, 􀀀 5.1 eV, and 􀀀 5.65
eV, respectively [17], the observed Fermi levels of their thin layers
deposited on glass plates were nearly the same (􀀀 4.71 eV, 􀀀 4.73 eV, and
􀀀 4.76 eV, respectively) in air [16,23], and indicated that the Fermi level
of the deposited organic layers from air on the their surfaces pinned the
Fermi levels of thin layers of these metals, and was estimated to be the
average of the observed Fermi levels of the thin layers of these metals, i.
e., 􀀀 4.73 eV. It is noted that the actually observed Fermi levels of thin
metal layers were fluctuated as seen later in this study, since it takes
such a long time as more than several weeks to achieve the Fermi level
equalization between the deposited organic layer from air and the thin
layers of metals [16].
The electronic energy levels of Ag nanoparticles are evaluated below.
When the average thickness of Ag was equal to or more than 10 nm,
deposited Ag atoms formed continuous layers. Since the continuous
layers exhibited their ionization energy of 4.58 eV on the average
without dependence on their thickness, they were attributed to Ag in
bulk in air. When their average thickness was less than 10 nm, deposited
Ag atoms formed isolated Ag nanoparticles, their ionization energy
increasing with decrease in the average thickness of deposited Ag layers.
The observed ionization energies of isolated Ag nanoparticles in
deposited Ag layers with average thickness of 0.3 nm, 1.0 nm, and 3.0
nm were 4.85 eV, 4.67 eV, and 4.63 eV, respectively, their deviation
from that of bulk Ag being 0.26 eV, 0.09 eV, and 0.05 eV, respectively.
According to Kubo, the deviation is the electric energy of a positive
charge in a nanoparticle with diameter of d after its ionization, and is
given by e2/d [24,25]. Then, the equivalent spherical diameter of isolated
nanoparticles in deposited Ag layers with average thickness of 0.3
nm, 1.0 nm, and 3.0 nm were estimated to be 5.5 nm, 16 nm, and 36 nm,
respectively.
The stability of latent image centers against oxidation has been discussed
below on the basis of the electronic energy levels of materials in
the NIT layers. It was estimated that the smallest latent image centers in
emulsions, which were free from gold sensitization, were composed of
4–5 Ag atoms [7]. Since the ionization energy of Ag nanoparticles was
estimated to be 4.85 eV when their diameter was 5.5 nm, exhibiting the
tendency to increase with decreasing their size, the ionization energy of
latent image centers should be larger than this value. Furthermore,
positively charged oxidants including a positive hole cannot attack a
latent image center with electric charge of +1/2 owing to the repulsive
force between them [7]. Since the Fermi level of the organic layers was
evaluated to be 􀀀 4.71 eV, it is difficult for O2 and other oxidizing gases
in air to oxidize latent image centers so rapidly and significantly as to
meet the decay of the centers, which is studied later in this paper.
The formation and characterization of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 have been initiated
by the PYSA measurement of the NIT layers. Fig. 3 shows the PYSA
spectra of the NIT layers with and without SS. The observed onset of
photo-electron yield in the lower energy region with about 4.5 eV could
be attributed to the photo-electron emission from Ag clusters, which
were photolytically formed before and during the PYSA measurement,
since its threshold energy was close to that of Ag nanoparticles as seen in
Fig. 2, and in addition, similar photo-electron emission was observed
before [13]. The photoelectrons in the higher energy region with about
5.6 eV as its threshold in the spectrum of the layer in the absence of SS
could be attributed to those from AgBrI grains, since similar PYSA
spectra were already observed for emulsion layers with AgBrI grains in
the NIT as shown in Fig. 2 [19]. However, the observed onset of
photoelectron yield in the higher energy region with 5.4–5.5 eV as its
threshold in the spectrum of the layer in the presence of SS could not be
attributed to those from AgBrI grains, but to those from the species
created by the addition of SS to the layer, since the addition of SS to the
layer increased the yield and shifted the threshold energy of the
photoelectron emission.
Then, as shown in Fig. 4, the PYSA measurement has been extended
to gelatin layers, to which aqueous solutions of SS and AgNO3 were
added before their coating. Since neither photo-electron yield from a
gelatin layer with SS nor that from a gelatin layer with AgNO3 was larger
than that from a gelatin layer itself, it was judged that neither SS nor
AgNO3 in a gelatin layer had electrons with binding energy of less than
Fig. 2. The electronic energy levels of materials in the NIT as measured by the
PYSA apparatus used in this study, where a closed circle and VB are an electron
and valence band, respectively. The highest occupied electronic energy level of
SS was situated below 􀀀 6 eV and could not be indicated in this figure. Fig. 3. PYSA spectra of the NIT without (a, ○) and with SS (b, ●).
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
5
6 eV. On the other hand, strong photo-electron emission was observed
with threshold at 5.4–5.5 eV from gelatin layers, to which both SS and
AgNO3 were added. It is known that SO32􀀀 ions and Ag+ ions form soluble
complex ions of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 in aqueous solutions, and dissolve silver
halide grains by forming Ag(SO3)2 3
􀀀 with Ag+ ions on the grain surface
[26]. It is therefore considered that the observed photo-electrons with
threshold energy of 5.4–5.5 eV in Fig. 4 were emitted from Ag(SO3)23􀀀 in
gelatin layers. As shown in Fig. 5, the photo-electron yield at the energy
of 6 eV increased with increase in the amount of AgNO3 added, supporting
the idea that the photo-electrons were emitted from Ag(SO3)23􀀀
in gelatin layers. The deviation from the proportionality indicates that
Ag+ ions tended to be captured by methionine residues in gelatin chains
[10] in prior to form complex ions with SO32􀀀 ions when the added
amount of Ag+ was small, and that Ag+ ions tended to form Ag(SO3)-
instead of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 when the amount of Ag+ ions was large.
It is considered that the photo-electrons as observed above were
emitted from Ag⁺ in Ag(SO₃)₂3‾ according to the following reasons. First
of all, an SO₃2‾ ion had not any electron with binding energy of less than
6 eV and is furthermore in contact with a positively charged ion in Ag
(SO₃)₂3‾. Secondly, it was observed that the binding energy of an electron
in Ag⁺ could be so small as to capture a positive hole in AgCl at low
temperature by forming a self-trapped positive hole with Ag2⁺, which
was closely surrounded by 6 Cl‾ in AgCl [7]. It is therefore considered
that the association of 2 SO₃2‾anions to Ag+ brought about the
photo-electron emission with threshold at 5.4–5.5 eV from Ag+ in a Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 complex ion in a gelatin layer.
Thus, the PYSA spectrum of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 made it possible to consider
its influence on the interaction between Br2 and Agn in the NIT. While
each spectrum in Fig. 3 was expressed by plotting the square root of
photo-electron yield as a function of photon energy, the intersection
between the straight line and the background line in the spectrum of Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 gave 5.7 eV as its vertical ionization energy in the potential
energy profile (Fig. 6). However, instead of vertical ionization energy,
adiabatic ionization energy of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 complex ions is important for
the consideration of the electron exchange of the complex ions with their
surroundings, and could be given as 5.4–5.5 eV by the energy, at which
photo-electrons just begun to appear in their spectrum as illustrated in
Fig. 6. These results are drawn in Fig. 2. As seen in this figure, an Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 ion could give an electron to Br2 on the grain surface to become
an Ag(SO3)22􀀀 when they encountered with each other there. Since the
electron affinity of an Ag(SO3)22􀀀 ion is larger than the ionization energy
of a latent image center Agn, it was probable for the former to oxidize
the latter after the former migrate in gelatin phase and encounter with
the latter in the presence of a plenty of Br􀀀 as follows; Agn + Ag(SO3)2 2
􀀀
+ Br􀀀 → Agn-1 + Ag(SO3)23􀀀 + AgBr. Furthermore, it is noted that an
SO₃2‾ ion itself does not have an ability to reduce a Br2 molecule
Fig. 4. PYSA spectra of gelatin layers without SS(a), with SS (b, c, d, and f), and
with AgNO3 (b, c, d, and e). In the small table in this figure, the column of SS
indicates the fraction of SS in weight % with respect to gelatin, and that of Ag
indicates the fraction of AgNO3 in weight % with respect to gelatin.
Fig. 5. Yield of photo-electrons emitted from Ag(SO3)23􀀀 by excitation light of
6 eV as a function of added amount of AgNO3 in gelatin layers, to which SS (2
wt %) was added. White circles in this figure correspond to the photo-electron
yield values in the curves of f, b, c, and d, respectively, at the energy of excitation
light of 6.0 eV.
Fig. 6. Potential energy profiles of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 at its ground state and ionized
state. Solid and broken arrows respectively indicate the electronic transitions
for vertical ionization and adiabatic one.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
6
according to the electronic energy diagram in Fig. 2, and that it does not
eliminate Br₂ irreversibly although it is usually called a halogen acceptor
in the field of photographic science.
3.2. Observation of decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers
We aim to record as many DM events as possible within the detector
in terms of the event search. It means a DM exposure period should be as
long as possible. The experimental period shall be around several
months. However, if the created latent image centers are decomposed
due to the recombination, the experimental period shall be limited due
to the decay constant of the latent image center. Therefore, we investigated
how the created latent image centers decay depending on the
presence of SS and temperature.
Fig. 7 shows the comparison in observed sensitivity between the NIT
layers, to which SS was introduced by the pre-mix method and by the dip
method. The vertical and horizontal axes of the figure correspond to the
quantities related to the sensitivity to alpha rays and gamma rays,
respectively. These were quantified using image analysis of scattered
light observed with an optical microscope in the emulsion layer after the
development. The observed values of sensitivity by the pre-mix method
seem to be bit higher with smaller fluctuation than those by the dip
method. Since SO32􀀀 ions tend to dissolve AgBrI grains by forming Ag
(SO3)23􀀀 ions with Ag+ ions on the grain surface, it is considered that the
dip method causes the Ostwald ripening and dissolution of the grains
more strongly than the pre-mix method, enhancing the sensitivity
decrease and fluctuation. The observations and analyses of the decay of
latent image centers in the NIT layers under various conditions were
made by the pre-mix method and described below.
Fig. 8 shows the decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers
without SS, which were formed by α ray and γ ray irradiation and kept at
different temperature in air. As seen in this figure, the number of latent
image centers formed by γrays decreased up to about 1/5 after the
emulsion layers were kept for more than 30 days. The results shown in
Fig. 8 indicates that 1/5 latent image centers could survive and that
gelatin could protect about 1/5 of total latent image centers against the
reverse reaction in the NIT layers. However, the decay rate of latent
image centers depended on experimental conditions. Fig. 8 shows that
the decay rate of the latent image centers in the absence of SS formed by
α rays was smaller than that of the centers formed by γ rays. Since it is
predicted that α and γ rays create about 1000–2000 and 100–200
electron-hole pairs per grain, respectively, it is considered that the
number of Ag atoms in each latent image center formed by α ray irradiation
is larger by about 10 times than that in each center formed by
γray irradiation. A latent image center Agn loses its activity when it
becomes to be Ag3 after the repetition of its reverse reaction with Br2. It
is therefore considered that the decay rate of latent image centers decreases
with increase in the size of the centers. This consideration is in
accord with the above observation that the decay rate of latent image
centers formed by γ ray irradiation was larger by about 7 times than that
of the centers formed by αray irradiation.
The reverse reaction studied here is the essential process for solarization
with similar temperature dependence [27]. As seen in Fig. 8, the
decay rate at low temperature was smaller than that at high temperature,
and the observed values of the half-life (t1/2) of latent image centers
formed by γ rays at 16 ◦C (289 K) and 􀀀 15 ◦C (258 K), were 3.8 days and
38 days, respectively. The rate constant of the decay of latent image
centers is reciprocally proportional to t1/2, and is given by Aexp(-Ea/RT),
where A, Ea, R, and T are constant, activation energy, gas constant, and
absolute temperature. The value of Ea was given to be 4.8 kcal/mol by
applying the above-stated experimental result to the equation, and was
attributed to the activation energy of the diffusion of Br2 in gelatin
phase.
Fig. 9 shows the decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers
without and with SS when the centers were formed by α ray andγ ray
irradiations and kept at different temperatures in air. As seen in this
figure, the decay of the centers formed by γ ray irradiation was faster
than that of the centers formed by αray irradiation, confirming that the
size of latent image centers formed by γ ray irradiation was smaller than
that of the centers formed by α ray irradiation. In both cases, it was also
confirmed that the lowering of the storage temperature to keep irradiated
emulsion layers before development could significantly decrease
the decay rate of the centers, and was therefore useful to improve the
performance of the NIT. In every case, it was found that the addition of
SS to emulsion layers could decrease the decay rate of latent image
centers, and should be therefore expected to improve the performance of
the NIT. By taking into account the fact that, in addition to SS, gelatin is
also a halogen acceptor, the mechanisms of the effects of SS and gelatin
on the reverse reaction are discussed below.
As observed in the former paper [13], the reverse reaction of
irradiation-created Br2 with latent image centers in dried emulsion
layers having AgBrI grains, in which gelatin was immobile, could be
irreversibly depressed by gelatin, unless the volume ratio of gelatin in
emulsion layers was reduced to excess. According to Berg and Keller
[28], most latent image centers on AgBr grains were destroyed by
irradiation-created Br2 even in the presence of gelatin in hydrosol of
AgBr grains, where gelatin was mobile, although the rate of the
destruction could be significantly reduced by gelatin. It is known that a
methionine residue in a gelatin chain acting as Lewis base reacts with
Br2 acting as a Lewis acid to form a halogen bond. However, the halogen
bond formation is reversible, and a Br2 molecule, which is involved in
the halogen bond, still keeps its ability to react with an Agn to form
2AgBr.
According to the electronic energy levels of components in the NIT as
seen in Fig. 2, the electron affinity of Br2 on AgBrI grains is slightly larger
than the ionization energy of Ag(SO3)23􀀀 .. It is therefore considered that
the electron transfer from Ag(SO3)23􀀀 . to Br2 takes place to form Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 , which can move in gelatin phase and arrive at a latent image
center Agn to oxidize it. Since the reaction of Br2 with Agn was faster
than that of Ag(SO3)22􀀀 with Agn, it is considered that the mobility of Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 in gelatin phase was smaller than that of Br2. Emulsion layers
are composed of AgBrI grains suspended in gelatin with loose network of
its chains, through which small molecules and ions can migrate [29].
Gelatin chains are composed of various kinds of amino acid residues,
many of which are dissociated to have electric charges and thus reduces
the mobility of ionic species owing to attractive interaction between
them. It is known that non-ionized species diffuse more rapidly than the
Fig. 7. Comparison in sensitivity between the NIT layers, to which SS was
introduced by pre-mix method and by the dip method.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
7
ionized species of similar size in gelatin layers [30]. It is considered from
this viewpoint that the mobility of Br2 in gelatin phase should be larger
than that of Ag(SO3)22􀀀 , since Br2 is non-ionized, and smaller than an Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 ion.
Among amino acid residues in gelatin, only methionine residue is a
soft Lewis base and capable of reducing the mobility of such a Lewis acid
as Br2 by forming a halogen bond between them. However, the occupancy
of methionine residues in gelatin is only 0.4% [11]. It is therefore
considered that an Ag(SO3)2 2
􀀀 ion has smaller mobility with larger
activation energy for its diffusion than a Br2 molecule, and could thus
make the time for the reverse reaction so long as stated above. In
addition, nuclear recoils of the WIMP are predicted to create as many as
1000–2000 electron-hole pairs, and should therefore form large latent
image centers with slow decay rate. Thus, it is considered from the
above-stated results and analyses that the rate of the reverse reaction
between Agn and Br2 could be reduced to make the NIT layers available
for DM detection when they would contain sufficient amount of SS and
were kept at low temperature (􀀀 20 ◦C ~ 􀀀 50 ◦C) before development. It
is however probable that the reverse reaction would appear to destroy
Agn under some unexpected conditions.
While the reaction between methionine residue and Br2 is reversible,
methionine residue in gelatin chain can immobilize Br2 in emulsion
layers with large volume fraction of gelatin, since Br2 bound by such a
long chain as gelatin is hardly mobile in the layers. However, many
irradiation-created Br2 molecules can mobile and arrive at Agn in
emulsion layers when the volume fraction of gelatin in emulsion layers is
so small that the concentration of methionine residues in gelatin phase is
not enough to capture most Br2 molecules or when the concentration of
irradiation-created Br2 is so large that many Br2 molecules can escape
from methionine residues in gelatin phase.
3.3. Depression of reverse reaction between Agn and Br2
It has been found from the above-stated examination that the reverse
reaction between Agn and irradiation-created Br2 is especially severe in
the NIT and has not been fully overcome at the present. Then, considerations
are made on ideas to cause further depression of the reverse
reaction between Agn and Br2 according to the knowledge obtained in
this study and reported in literature [7,13,31,32]. The methods to
irreversibly remove Br2 on the surface of AgBrI grains in emulsion layers
include reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and
2-electron sensitization [7,31]. Reduction sensitization centers are
composed of Ag2 at neutral kink sites on the surface of AgBrI grains, and
usually formed by weakly reducing the grains. However, reduction
sensitization is not compatible to S + Au sensitization, which is usually
used for highly sensitive photographic emulsions including nuclear
emulsions for the OPERA experiment, since gold sensitization tends to
make Ag2 a fog center [7]. Fortunately, the NIT are free from gold
sensitization, and therefore afford reduction sensitization. Hydrogen
hypersensitization is carried out by keeping emulsion layers in hydrogen
gas after evacuation for weak reduction of the surface of AgBrI grains in
the layers [32]. Although hydrogen hypersensitization is compatible to
Fig. 8. The degree of the decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers without SS, both of which were irradiated by α rays (left-hand side) and by γ rays (right-hand
side), and kept in air for time period described on the abscissa at temperature indicated in the figures.
Fig. 9. The decay of latent image centers in the NIT layers without and with SS in air at temperature indicated in the figures. The results with latent image centers,
which were formed by α ray and γ ray irradiations, were shown by solid and broken lines, respectively.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
8
S + Au sensitization, it forms the centers composed of Ag2 at negatively
charged kink sites, which are not stable for a long time in air [7]. While
the mechanism of 2-electron sensitization is similar to that of reduction
sensitization, it has been designed to be compatible to S + Au sensitization
by replacing Ag2 with a special organic compound [31]. Neither
reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, nor 2-electron
sensitization has ever been examined for nuclear emulsions in the past.
Another way to depress the reverse reaction between Agn and
irradiation-created Br2 is to decrease its rate further. This way should be
achieved by decreasing the mobility of such medium species as Ag
(SO3)22􀀀 in gelatin phase and by increasing the size of Agn. Ways to
achieve the former include the lowering of the temperature for keeping
irradiated emulsion layers before development, and the increase of the
size and electric charges of medium species. Ways to achieve the latter,
to increase the size of Agn include the increase in the number of electronhole
pairs per grain by irradiation, and increase in the efficiency of the
formation and growth of latent image centers Agn. While a way to increase
the number of electron-hole pairs per grain is to increase the size
of the grains, it is likely to suffer from the reduction in the read-out
efficiency of developed grains. Ways to increase the efficiency of formation
and growth of Agn are to depress two kinds of recombination;
direct recombination between free electrons and free positive holes and
reverse reaction between Agn and irradiation-created Br2. Direct
recombination could be depressed by introducing the traps for electrons
and positive holes [3,7]. In silver halide grains, traps for electrons and
positive holes are usually crystal defects and impurities, respectively
[8]. Crystal defects includes dislocations and silver ions at kink sites on
the grain surfaces. Impurities includes iodide ions in AgBrI grains, and is
expected to be improved by increasing the concentration of iodide ions
or by localizing them within the core portion of the grains. Effective
ways to depress the reverse reaction between Agn and Br2 are such
irreversible treatments as reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization,
and 2-electron sensitization, as stated above.
4. Summary
Following the previous study [3], which characterized DM event in
super-fine-grained nuclear emulsions by direct recombination and
reverse reaction between the products of ionic relaxation (i.e., Agn and
Br2), the present study was made on the latter by placing its focus on the
performance of a typical halogen acceptor Na2SO3 (SS), which is used to
enhance the sensitivity of the emulsions and is therefore expected to
influence the reverse reaction. By means of PYSA, it has been revealed
that Ag(SO3)23􀀀 took a place of Br2 for the reverse reaction by giving an
electron to Br2 and remarkably reduce the rate of the reverse reaction,
although Na2SO3 by itself could not irreversibly remove the reverse
reaction. Discussions have been made on ideas to cause further
depression and irreversible removal of the reverse reaction, including
reduction sensitization, hydrogen hypersensitization, and 2-electron
sensitization.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Tadaaki Tani: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Takashi Asada: Writing – review &
editing, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation. Takayuki Uchida: Writing – review & editing, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Tatsuhiro Naka: Writing
– review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number JP18H03699 and JP19H05806.
References
[1] T.M. Undagoltla, Rauch Ludwig, Dark matter direct-detection experiments, J. Phys.
G: Nucl. Part, Phys. 43 (2016) 013001.
[2] T. Naka, T. Asada, T. Katsuragawa, K. Hakamata, M. Yoshimoto, K. Kuwabara,
M. Nakamura, O. Sato, T. Nakano, Y. Tawara, G. De Lellis, C. Sirignano,
N. D’Ambrossio, Fine grained nuclear emulsion for higher resolution tracking
detector, Nuclear Inst, Methods in Physical Research A 718 (2013) 519–521.
[3] T. Tani, T. Naka, Dark matter event in nuclear emulsions: comparative analysis by
time-resolved photoconductivity of silver halide grains, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. A 1046 (2023) 167633.
[4] T. Asada, T. Naka, K. Kuwabara, M. Yoshimoto, The development of a super-finegrained
nuclear emulsion, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2017 (2017) 063H01, https://
doi.org/10.1093/ptep/ptx076.
[5] T. Shiraishi, S. Akamatsu, T. Naka, T. Asada, G. De Lellis, V. Tioukov, G. Rosa,
R. Kobayashi, N. Ambrosio, A. Alexandrov, O. Sato, Environmental sub-MeV
neutron measurement at the Gran Sasso surface laboratory with a super-finegrained
nuclear emulsion detector, Phys. Rev. C 107 (2023) 014608.
[6] S. Sala, A. Ariga, A. Ereditato, M. Giammarchi, M. Leone, C. Pistillo, P. Scampoli,
First demonstration of antimatter wave interferometry, Sci. Adv. 5 (2019) eaav
7610.
[7] T. Tani, Photographic Science Advances in Nanoparticles, J-Aggregates, Dye
Sensitization, and Organic Devices, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
[8] W. Schottky, W.T. Read Jr., Statistics of the recombination of holes and electrons,
Phys. Rev. 87 (1952) 835.
[9] T. Toshito, K. Kodama, L. Sihver, K. Yusa, M. Ozaki, K. Amako, S. Kameoka,
K. Murakami, T. Sasaki, S. Aoki, T. Ban, T. Fukuda, M. Komatsu, H. Kubota,
N. Naganawa, T. Nakamura, T. Nakano, M. Natsume, K. Niwa, S. Takahashi,
J. Yoshida, H. Yoshida, M. Nakazawa, N. Kanematsu, M. Komori, S. Sato, M. Asai,
T. Koi, C. Fukushima, S. Ogawa, M. Shibasaki, H. Shibuya, Measurements of total
and partial charge-changing cross sections for 200- to 400-MeV/nucleon 12C on
water and polycarbonate, Phys. Rev. C75 (2007) 054606.
[10] J.E. Maskasky, A comparison of oxidized and nonoxidized gelatins. I. Silver ion
binding, J. Imag. Sci. 33 (1989) 10–13.
[11] P.I. Rose, Gelatin I. General properties, in: T.H. James (Ed.), The Theory of the
Photographic Process, fourth ed., Macmillan, New York, 1977, pp. 51–67.
[12] Akira Nishio, Kunihiro Morishima, Ken-ichi Kuwabara, Tetsuo Yoshida,
Takeshi Funakubo, Nobuko Kitagawa, Mitsuaki Kuno, Yuta Manabe,
Mitsuhiro Nakamura, Nuclear emulsion with excellent long-term stability
developed for cosmic-ray imaging, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 966 (2020)
163850.
[13] T. Tani, A. Nishio, T. Uchida, K. Morishima, Track formation in nuclear plates for
cosmic-ray imaging with stabilized Ag nanoparticles, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.
Res. A 1006 (2021) 165427.
[14] K. Alan Yamakawa, Silver bromide crystal counters, Phys. Rev. 82 (1951) 522–526.
[15] Y. Nakajima, M. Hoshino, D. Yamashita, M. Uda, Near edge structures of Mg-, Co-,
Cu-, and Zn-tetraphenylporphyrins measured by PESA and calculated with DV-Xα,
Adv. Quant. Chem. 42 (2003) 399–405.
[16] T. Tani, R. Kan, Y. Yamano, T. Uchida, Stabilization of Ag nanostructures by tuning
their Fermi levels, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 57 (2018) 055001.
[17] H. Ishii, K. Seki, Energy level alignment at organic-metal interfaces, in: W.
R. Salaneck, K. Seki, A. Kahn, J.-J. Pireaux (Eds.), Conjugated Polymer and
Molecular Interfaces Science and Technology for Photonic and Optoelectronic
Applications, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, Basel, 2001, pp. 293–349.
[18] K. Siegbahn, C. Nordling, A. Fahlman, R. Nordberg, K. Hamrin, J. Hedman,
G. Johansson, T. Bergmark, S.-E. Karlsson, I. Lindgren, B. Lindgren, Atomic Esca,
Molecular and Solid State Structure Studied by Means of Electron Spectroscopy,
Almqvist & Wiksells Bpktryckeri AB, Uppsala, 1967.
[19] T. Tani, T. Uchida, T. Naka, Analyses and design of nuclear emulsions for dark
matter detection, Radiat. Meas. 129 (2019) 106184.
[20] T. Tani, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Nishimi, T. Uchida, A. Kudo, Examination of
photocatalytic Z-scheme for overall water splitting with its electronic structure,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 25 (2023) 11418–11428, https://doi.org/10.1039/
D3CP00241A.
[21] M. Svanqvist, K. Hansen, Non-jellium scaling of metal cluster ionization energies
and electron affinity, Eur. Phys. J. D 56 (2010) 199–203.
[22] K. Rademann, B. Kaiser, U. Uven, F. Hensel, Size dependence of the gradual
transition to metallic properties in isolated mercury clusters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59
(1987) 2319–2321.
T. Tani et al.
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1063 (2024) 169303
9
[23] T. Tani, T. Uchida, Studies on electronic structure of interfaces between Ag and
gelatin for stabilization of Ag nanoparticles, J. J. Appl. Phys. 54 (2015) 065001.
[24] R. Kubo, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 17 (1962) 975–986.
[25] R. Kubo, Ultra-fine particles. Editorial Board on Ultra-Fine Particles, AGNE Gijutsu
Center, Tokyo, 1984, pp. 4–10 (in Japanese).
[26] J. Pouradier, A. Pailliotet, C. R. Berry, Properties of silver halides I. Structure and
thermodynamic properties, in: Ref.18, pp.1-12.
[27] P.J. Hillson, E.A. Sutherns, Latent-image effect involving reversal or
desensitization, in: C.E.K. Mees, T.H. James (Eds.), The Theory of the Photographic
Process, third ed., Macmillan, New York, 1966 (Chapter 8).
[28] W.F. Berg, H. Keller, Latent-image fading and the function of gelatin in the silver
halide System, Photogr. Sci. Eng. 11 (1967) 178–180.
[29] J.E. Jolly, Photogr, Sci. Eng. 14 (1970) 169–177.
[30] T. H. James, The rate of development I. General kinetics of negative image
development, in: Ref.18, pp.404-429.
[31] I.R. Gould, J.R. Lenhard, A.A. Muenter, S.A. Godleski, S. Farid, Two-electron
sensitization: a new concept for silver halide photography, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122
(2000) 11934–11943.
[32] T.A. Babcock, M.H. Sewell, W.C. Lewis, T.H. James, Hypersensitization of
Spectroscopic Films and Plates Using Hydrogen Gas, vol. 79, 1974, p. 1479.
>>>>>>> 2722771823fc534d44839a79e520392765d8cbd3
T. Tani et al.