Sensors & Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
Available online 6 February 2024
0924-4247/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Improvement of environmental robustness in non-invasive core body
temperature sensor studied numerically and experimentally
Yuki Hashimoto *, Soto Tada , Yoshifumi Nishida
School of Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152–8552, Japan
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Core body temperature
Wearable Sensor
Heat flux
Heat-related illnesses
A B S T R A C T
Preventing heat-related illnesses, which are on the rise due to intense heat, constitutes a critical social issue. The
monitoring of core body temperature presents an efficient measure, as heat-related illnesses disrupt the balance
of thermoregulatory functions. Directly measuring core body temperature is typically highly invasive and
impractical for use during physical activity. The heat flux method, which represents one of the non-invasive core
body temperature estimation methods utilizing a skin-attachable heat flow sensor, has been reported as an
appropriate approach for active measurements. One notable practical challenge revolves around the occurrence
of significant measurement errors due to fluctuations in ambient air temperature and airflow. Here we propose a
novel core body temperature sensor grounded in this method, designed to be resilient to variations in the surrounding
environment. We substantiate this through both theoretical and experimental verification. Utilizing
numerical analysis, we investigated the impact of the proposed sensor structure on estimation. Our theoretical
analysis demonstrates the potential to estimate core body temperature more accurately than is achievable with
the conventional method, particularly when the ambient temperature and airflow are variable. Furthermore, in
line with the outcomes of our numerical analysis, we conducted experimental demonstrations showing the accurate
estimation of core body temperature, even under changing airflow conditions. These results strongly
validate the efficacy of our proposed new core body temperature sensor, which exhibits resilience to changes in
the surrounding environment, both in theory and practice. This outcome is poised to significantly enlarge the
potential application scope of non-invasive core body temperature sensors.
1. Introduction
In recent years, due to the advancement of global warming, the
frequency of extreme weather events [1] and natural disasters [2] have
increased, threatening our lives. In particular, the control of heat-related
illnesses, which are increasing due to intense heat, has become an urgent
social issue [3–5]. Heat-related illnesses are conditions in which prolonged
exposure to a hot, humid environment disrupts the balance of
thermoregulatory functions, allowing heat to build up inside the body
[6]. Since the internal body temperature (core body temperature) rises
during the onset of heat-related illnesses, it is recommended to keep the
core body temperature below 38 ◦C (38.5 ◦C during heat acclimation) as
one of the preventive measures [7,8], and the development of technology
to easily measure the core body temperature in daily life with high
accuracy is expected [9,10]. In general, measuring core body temperature
is highly invasive because a temperature sensor needs to be inserted
into the inner body from the body cavity [10]. While this method is
largely impractical for use in outdoor settings, gastrointestinal temperature
measurements using ingestible thermometer pills have been
applied successfully [11–13]. Although the period following ingestion of
the pills does not influence the validity of the measurements [14],
inevitably these pills transit through the gut and the replacement cost
imposes an economic burden during long-duration monitoring. Measurement
of gastrointestinal temperature is not always applicable during
daily routines or when regular fluid consumption is recommended
operational practice [10,15]. On the other hand, the heat flux method,
which is a non-invasive method for estimating core body temperature
from heat flow in the vicinity of the skin measured by a skin-attachable
sensor, has been reported as a suitable method for measurements during
activities [16–21]. Fig. 1 shows the schematic illustration of the method.
The method estimates core body temperature from the readings of each
sensor when the skin is brought into contact with a probe made of
insulating material with sensors capable of measuring the temperature
of the skin and its opposing side. Specifically, assuming that the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: hashimoto.y.ai@m.titech.ac.jp (Y. Hashimoto).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/sensors-and-actuators-a-physical
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2024.115136
Received 24 August 2023; Received in revised form 4 January 2024; Accepted 4 February 2024
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
2
temperature distribution in the vicinity of the probe is steady and
one-dimensional, the core body temperature (Tbody) is simply estimated
using Eq. 1 from the temperatures (Tskin, Tsen) measured by the sensors
[16].
Tbody = Tskin +A(Tskin 􀀀 Tsen) (1)
A = Rskin
{
Rsen
􀀀 1 +
(
Rleak + 2Rair +
RairRleak
Rskin
)􀀀 1
}
(2)
Where Rair, Rsen, Rskin, and Rleak are thermal resistances of the air, the
sensor probe, the skin (vertical), and the skin (lateral), respectively.
Actual measurements are conducted by determining the parameter “A”
in Eq. 1 by comparing the estimated value with the probe with a reference
value of core body temperature such as rectal temperature,
esophageal temperature, etc. The parameter “A” in Eq. 1 can be
described by Eq. 2. As the temperature and airflow around the probe
change, the thermal resistance of the air (Rair) increases or decreases.
causing the parameter “A” in Eq. 1 to change, resulting in a large estimation
error in core body temperature. This is one of the challenges in
core body temperature estimation with conventional heat flux methods
for practical use. Several studies related to the problem have been reported.
Janke et al. claim that the conventional heat flux method shown
in Fig. 1 is not affected by ambient temperature fluctuation. However, as
mentioned above, this claim is incorrect because some terms in the
estimation equation are affected by changes in ambient temperature and
airflow shown in Eqs. 1 and 2 [22]. Welles et al. have reported the
clinical data on the accuracy of the conventional heat flux method in
changing the ambient temperature under the specific air flow. In the
experiment, the effect of ambient temperature and air flow change on
the estimation error was not quantitatively analyzed, but it was reported
that a relatively large error of about 0.5 ◦C occurred [23]. Kitamura
et al. mentioned that the ambient temperature and airflow change affect
the measurement value of the conventional heat flux method and as a
countermeasure, a plan of covering with sponge-like material of low
thermal conductivity is proposed, but the concrete verification data are
only the verification results when the ambient temperature is changed to
20, 25, 30 ◦C without air flow, and the robustness under the air flow
generation has not been verified [18]. From the above, the fundamental
solution on air temperature and airflow countermeasure and validation
data in the heat flux method have not been sufficiently reported in the
conventional study. Here, we focus on aforementioned technical issue
and propose a new core body temperature sensor based on the heat flux
method, which is robust to changes in the surrounding environment, and
report the results of both theoretical and experimental verification.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Measurement theory
The outline of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 2. In this
method, a material with high thermal conductivity is wrapped around
the sensor probe. The method aims to control the horizontal heat flow in
the skin under the sensor probe without being affected by changes in
ambient temperature and airflow by forcibly redirecting the heat flow
between the skin and the outside air to the covering layer. This step
addresses one of the error factors in the conventional methods. An
equation for estimating the core body temperature taking the above into
account is shown in Eqs. 3 and 4. Rcover and R∗leak describe thermal resistances
of the covering layer and skin (lateral). Eqs. 3 and 4 are simply
expressed as Eq. 5, assuming that the thermal conductivity of the cover
layer is sufficiently higher than that of other materials and approximating
Rcover = 0. This equation does not include the thermal resistance
of the air (Rair), which is dependent on ambient temperature and airflow,
unlike the conventional equations (Eqs. 1 and 2). In addition, the heat
capacity of the skin (Cskin) is considered, aiming to compensate for heat
flow changes during transient state, a factor that is not considered in the
conventional models. In actual measurement, as in the conventional
method, it is necessary to compare the measured value of the sensor
probe with the reference value in advance to determine the unknown
parameters (Rskin(R-s1en +Rl-e1ak), RskinCskin) in Eq. 5.
Tbody = Tskin +BRskin(Tskin 􀀀 Tsen)+RskinCskin
dTskin
dt (3)
B=
1
Rsen
+
(
1􀀀
Rcover
Rsen
)
•
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
Rcover
⎧⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
1+
Rcover
R∗
leak +2Rair +
R∗
leakRair
Rskin
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
􀀀 1
•
(
1+
Rleak
Rskin
)
+1
⎫⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎭
+Rleak
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
􀀀 1
(4)
Tbody = Tskin +Rskin
􀀀
Rsen
􀀀 1+Rleak
􀀀 1
)
(Tskin 􀀀 Tsen)+RskinCskin
dTskin
dt (5)
2.2. Numerical simulation method
For the theoretical examination of the proposed method, the numerical
analysis using the finite element method was conducted. The
steady-state or transient state of the temperature distribution in the
measurement system, comprising the sensor probe, probe cover, biological
tissue, and air as outlined in the proposed method, was computed
using the following equations as shown in Eqs. 6–8 [24,25]. Eq. 6
Fig. 1. Overview of core body temperature measurement by the conventional
heat flux method. “T” and “R” in the figure represent the temperature and
thermal resistance of each part.
Fig. 2. Overview of core body temperature measurement by the proposed heat
flux method. “T”, “R”, and “C” in the figure represent the temperature, thermal
resistance, and thermal capacity of each part.
Y. Hashimoto et al.
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
3
describes the heat conduction equation in each material for obtaining
the steady or transient state of the temperature distribution. Eqs. 7 and 8
describe momentum conservation equations for obtaining the steady or
transient state of the velocity field of the air. The temperature distribution
in the presence of airflow in the measurement system is solved by
combining these equations.
ρCp
∂T
∂t + ρCpu • ∇T +∇ • ( 􀀀 k∇T) = 0 (6)
ρ
(
∂u
∂t + u • ∇u
)
= 􀀀 ∇p+∇ •
[
μ{
∇u+(∇u)
tr }
􀀀
2
3
μ(∇ • u)
]
(7)
ρ∇ • u = 0 (8)
where k, Cp, ρ, T, u, μ, p and t represent the thermal conductivity,
heat capacity, density, temperature, velocity (fluid only), viscosity (fluid
only), pressure (fluid only) and time of the materials, respectively. Also,
“tr” indicates for the transposed matrix. The finite element analysis
software COMSOL Multiphysics® was utilized for the computation. A
two-dimensional axisymmetric model consisting of a cylindrical probe,
probe cover, skin and air was used as the computational model as shown
in Fig. 3. As boundary conditions, outside air temperature (Tair) and
airflow velocity (Vair) were set on the upper surface of the air, outflow
boundaries were set on the air side, core body temperature (Tbody) was
set on the lower surface of the skin, and thermally insulated boundaries
were set on the skin side. Additionally, the computation was conducted
with the interface between the probe cover and the air assuming a noslip
condition. The skin tissue was simply modeled as a uniform tissue
with density ρ = 1109 kg/m3, k = 0.37 W/(m⋅K), and Cp = 3391 J/
(kg⋅K) without considering the effect of sweat secretion on the skin
surface and blood flow for focusing on the effect of ambient temperature
and airflow changes.
2.3. Experimental method
Based on the outcomes of the numerical analysis, experimental
verification of the proposed method using a prototype was conducted. A
cylindrical structure (rsen = 7.5 mm, tsen = 5.0 mm) with temperature
sensors (LT 􀀀 2 N 􀀀 12, Gram Co., Ltd.) embedded in the contact surface
with the skin and the opposite surface was fabricated by molding polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) as a sensor probe constituting the prototype.
UV-curable PDMS (KER 􀀀 4690 - A/B, Shin Etsu Silicone Co., Ltd.),
which has less thermal shrinkage and is superior in moldability, was
used for PDMS, and the curing conditions during molding were similar
to those of previous studies [26–28]. An aluminum cover structure (tcover,
1 = tcover, 2 = 2.5 mm) was fabricated by machining with an NC milling
machine (AE 74, Makino), a machining center (V 33 i, Makino), and a
wire-cut electric discharge machine (AD 􀀀 325 L LN 1 W, Sodick) as the
probe cover constituting the prototype. An in-vitro measurement system
was constructed for the validation experiment. The system is consisted
of a heater (ND-1 A, AZONE) that simulates core body temperature,
ethylene-propylene diene monomer rubber (EPDM) (10 mm thick)
placed on the heater which close to the thermal conductivity of the skin
[29–32], and the prototype placed on the EPDM layer. In this experiment,
the measured values of the prototype and the core body temperature
estimated using Eq. 5 were evaluated when an airflow change was
applied from above the prototype by a fan whose wind velocity could be
controlled by the number of revolutions. Rskin(R-s1en +Rl-e1ak) in Eq. 5 was
experimentally calculated from Eq. 9 using he reference value of core
body temperature (Tref) and the measured value by the prototype (Tskin,
Tsen) in the windless and steady state, and RskinCskin in Eq. 5 was set to a
value that minimized the time integration of the absolute estimation
error during the transient response using the generalized reduced
gradient method.
Rskin
􀀀
Rsen
􀀀 1+Rleak
􀀀 1
)
=
Tref 􀀀 Tskin
Tskin 􀀀 Tsen
(9)
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Numerical simulation
3.1.1. Effect of thermal conductivity
The relationship between the thermal conductivities of the constituent
materials and the estimation error at steady state is shown in Fig. 4.
The calculations were conducted under the following conditions: Tair
= 20 ◦C, Tbody = 37 ◦C, Vin = 5 m/s, rsen = 15 mm, tsen = 5 mm, tcover,1
= 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. The results confirmed that there exists an optimum
value for the thermal conductivity of the probe (kprobe), and that
the higher the thermal conductivity of the probe cover (kcover), the
smaller the estimation error. The former reason is considered to be that
when kprobe is low, the unconsidered skin-air heat flow in Eq. 5 increases
and the estimation error increases in the proposed method, while when
kprobe is high, the unconsidered heat flow from the skin around the probe
to the probe in Eq. 5 increases and the estimation error increases. The
latter reason is considered to be that the higher kcover, the less the unconsidered
heat flow in the proposed method described in the former
reason, thus reducing the estimation error. Based on the results, it is
considered desirable that the probe material should have a thermal
conductivity around 2 W/(m･K). However, since the materials in the
Fig. 3. Two-dimensional axisymmetric computational model and the boundary
conditions used to compute temperature distributions in the measurement
system.
Fig. 4. Calculation results of core body temperature estimation error in the
proposed method in various thermal conductivities of sensor probe and probe
cover (kprobe, kcover).
Y. Hashimoto et al.
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
4
above range are brittle materials that are difficult to fabricate, such as
glass and ceramics, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) [33–35], which has a
lower thermal conductivity but is superior in ease of fabrication, was
adopted for further investigation. On the other hand, as for the cover
material, it was decided to adopt aluminum [36–38], which has a
relatively high thermal conductivity and is an inexpensive material with
ease of fabrication, for further investigation.
3.1.2. Effect of ambient temperature and airflow
Fig. 5 shows the calculation results of the estimation error at steady
state when the ambient temperature and wind velocity change in both of
the conventional and proposed method. The calculations were conducted
under the following conditions: Tbody = 37 ◦C, rsen = 15 mm, tsen
= 5 mm, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. From the calculation results, it
was confirmed that the proposed method estimates with higher accuracy
over a wide temperature and wind velocity range than the conventional
method. A common feature of them is that the estimation error tends to
increase when the ambient temperature is low or the wind velocity is
large. This is because the difference between the core body and ambient
temperature increases when the ambient temperature is low, and the
heat transfer coefficient of the air increases when the wind velocity is
high, thereby increasing the skin-air heat transfer, which is an error
factor for both methods. Here, in order to analyze the horizontal heat
flow in the skin, which is an error factor for both methods, the ratio of
the heat flux in the normal direction in Area II to the sum of the heat
fluxes in Area I and Area II in the calculation domain shown in Fig. 6a is
defined as heat loss rate [%]. For example, in the conventional method,
when Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 0 m/s (Fig. 6b), the heat loss rate is 0.87%,
while when Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 5.0 m/s (Fig. 6c), the heat loss rate is
26.1%, indicating that the heat transfer in the horizontal direction increases
due to the generation of the airflow. In the proposed method, the
heat loss rate is 8.25% when Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 0 m/s (Fig. 6d),
while the heat loss rate is 8.83% when Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 5.0 m/s
(Fig. 6c), indicating that the effect of the airflow on the horizontal heat
flow is reduced. It is considered that the above effect of the proposed
method is one of the reasons to reduce the estimation error over a wide
temperature and wind velocity range compared with the conventional
method.
3.1.3. Effect of size and shape
Fig. 7a shows the calculation results of the steady-state estimation
error by the proposed method when the probe cover design parameters
(tcover,1 and tcover,2) are changed, and Fig. 7b shows the calculation results
of the steady-state estimation error by the proposed method when the
probe design parameters (rsen and tsen) are changed. The former was
calculated with Tair = 20 ◦C, Tbody = 37 ◦C, Vin = 5 m/s, rsen = 15 mm,
tsen = 5 mm, and the latter was calculated with Tair = 20 ◦C, Tbody
= 37 ◦C, Vin = 5 m/s, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2 = 5 mm. From the calculation
results, it was confirmed that the larger tcover,1 and rsen, and the
smaller tcover,2 and tsen, the lower the estimation error. The increase in
tcover,1 and rsen and the decrease in tcover,2 and tsen are considered to be due
to the effect of reducing the thermal resistance of the probe cover and
probe, which is similar to the effect of using probe covers and probes
with high thermal conductivity.
3.1.4. Effect of transient response
One of the most common scenes in daily life is a scene in which a
person stays in a hot environment for a long time and then moves to an
air-conditioned room, and the calculation results of the time change in
the estimation error of each method when the ambient temperature and
wind velocity change rapidly are shown in Fig. 8. In the calculation,
first, the steady solution of the temperature distribution in the calculation
area was calculated under the conditions of Tair = 35 ◦C, Tbody
= 37 ◦C, Vair = 0 m/s, rsen = 15 mm, tsen = 5 mm, tcover,1 = 5 mm, tcover,2
= 5 mm. Next, as shown in Fig. 8a, using the steady solution as the
initial value, the transient solution of the temperature distribution was
calculated as the ambient temperature and wind velocity changed from
35 ◦C to 20 ◦C and from 0 m/s to 5 m/s, respectively, between 60 and
180 s after the start of the calculation. Finally, the estimation error of
each time in each method was calculated using Eqs. 1 and 5 (Fig. 8b). In
the case of the conventional method and the proposed method without
considering Cskin, it was confirmed that the estimation error increased
due to changes in ambient temperature and wind velocity and then
gradually decreased. Fig. 9 shows the time variation of the sensing
temperature (Tskin, Tsen) for each method and the absolute value of the
time derivative of the temperature in the calculation domain at representative
times. It takes about 30 min for the temperature field in the
measurement area of both methods to stabilize. At the beginning of the
calculation, both methods show large temperature changes. The conventional
and proposed method without considering Cskin is unable to
cope with the temperature change, thus increasing the estimation error.
On the other hand, the estimation error is reduced by compensating for
the above temperature change at the time of estimation in the proposed
method considering Cskin. Comparing with the maximum error, the error
in the proposed method with and without considering Cskin are 7.23 ◦C,
0.72 ◦C, respectively. Comparing the root mean square error (RSME) for
the first 30 min of the calculation, the error in the proposed method with
and without considering Cskin are 3.12 ◦C and 0.15 ◦C, respectively. The
estimation errors were reduced by about 90% in terms of maximum
error and by about 95% in terms of RSME, and it was confirmed that the
estimation errors could be significantly reduced by the proposed method
considering Cskin from the both viewpoints. In addition, in order to
quantitatively compare the time response, we compare the time from
180 s when the temperature and wind velocity changes end until the
estimation error falls within ± 0.2 ◦C. The proposed method takes about
20 min 20 s without considering Cskin, while the proposed method
considering Cskin takes about 1 min 50 s. The results confirm that the
proposed method with Cskin considered can improve the time response
under the estimation compared with the method without considering
Cskin.
3.2. Experiment with prototype
Fig. 10c shows the temporal changes in the heater temperature
(equivalent to the reference value of core body temperature) and the
estimated value when the airflow shown in Fig. 10b is applied from
directly above the prototype using the experimental system with the
prototype described in 2.3 (Fig. 10a). The measurement results of the
conventional method, that is, the prototype without the aluminum
cover, are also shown in the same figure. It was confirmed that the core
body temperature was estimated in good response to the variation of the
reference value in the proposed method, although a relatively large error
occurred immediately after the large fluctuation of the airflow in the
conventional method as with the numerical simulation results of the
transient response shown in Fig. 9. Fig. 10d shows Bland-Altman plots of
Fig. 5. Calculation results of core body temperature estimation errors for each
method under various ambient temperature and airflow conditions. (a) Conventional
approach. (b) The proposed method.
Y. Hashimoto et al.
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
5
the reference and estimated values in the proposed and conventional
methods. Overall, in the proposed method, it was confirmed that the
estimation error was maintained within 0.076 ◦C, including the error at
the time of airflow generation mentioned above. The estimation error is
highly accurate compared to the maximum allowable error ( ± 0.2 ◦C)
of a typical electronic thermometer. Furthermore, comparing the measurement
error (mean ± 3 SD) under each wind velocity, it was 0.0135
± 0.0405 ◦C when a 1.4 m/s airflow was generated, and 0.0120
± 0.0431 ◦C when a 4.4 m/s airflow was generated, indicating that the
amount of airflow had little effect on the measurement error. From the
result, it was experimentally confirmed that the proposed method, as
well as the numerical analysis results, can measure core body temperature
with high accuracy even during airflow.
3.3. Limitations of the project
The purpose of this study was to reduce the estimation error with the
change of ambient temperature and airflow, which is one of the technical
problems in the heat flux type core body temperature sensor, and
the calculation and experimental method was simplified. In human trials,
it is considered that phenomena which has not been considered in
this study such as heat dissipation in the skin surface with sweating,
change of skin blood flow, and generation of contact resistance between
the skin and sensor in wearing become potential error factors in the
proposed method. Regarding the effect of heat dissipation by sweating,
it has been reported that the secretion of sweat from the skin around the
probe can be suppressed by keeping the pressure on the skin when the
probe is attached above a certain threshold [39], and it is considered
that the error can be reduced by utilizing such the phenomenon. On the
effect of the skin blood flow changes, it is considered that the effect can
be suppressed by choosing the part with little effect of the blood flow as
the measuring part. On the contact resistance between the skin and the
probe in the mounting, it is considered that it can be reduced by
providing the mounting method which can sufficiently maintain the
adhesion between the skin and the probe.
4. Conclusion
In this study, we proposed a new measurement method to reduce the
estimation error associated with changes of ambient temperature and
Fig. 6. (a) The idea of heat loss rate in the numerical domain. Results of each method and calculation of temperature distribution and heat loss rate for each
boundary condition. (b) Conventional method at Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 0 m/s. (c) Conventional method at Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 5 m/s. (d) The proposed method at
Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 0 m/s. (e) The proposed method at Tair = 20 ◦C and Vair = 5 m/s. Color bars are common in (b) - (e). Scale bar is 10 mm.
Fig. 7. Results of calculation of estimation error of the proposed method due to
difference in size and shape of components. (a) The probe cover. (b) The probe.
Fig. 8. (a) Temporal changes in ambient temperature and wind velocity. (b)
Time variation of estimation error in each method when ambient temperature
and wind velocity are changed rapidly.
Y. Hashimoto et al.
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
6
airflow, which is one of the technical issues in non-invasive core body
temperature measurement with the conventional heat flux methods,
which is vital biological information for countermeasures of heat-related
illnesses, and performed basic evaluations of the performance in the
proposed method by the numerical analysis. First, we evaluated the effect
of changes in temperature and wind velocity on the accuracy of core
body temperature estimation using the conventional and proposed
methods, and confirmed that the proposed method reduced the estimation
error over a wider range of ambient temperature and wind velocity
compared with the conventional method. Next, the effect of
component size on the performance of the proposed method was evaluated,
and it was confirmed that the estimation error decreased as the
thickness of the probe cover and that of sensor probe increased, and that
the same effect could be obtained by using materials with high thermal
conductivity. Furthermore, the effects of transient response were evaluated,
and it was confirmed that the proposed method could simultaneously
improve the estimation accuracy and time response. We also
conducted performance evaluation experiments with the prototype
based on the basis of the results of numerical analysis. The in vitro
experimental system was constructed to evaluate the estimation error in
response to airflow changes. As a result, it was confirmed that it was
possible to estimate core body temperature with high accuracy without
being affected by airflow changes. Based on the above, we conducted
basic evaluations of the proposed method from both theoretical and
experimental perspectives, and showed its validity. This result will
greatly contribute to the future development of heat flux-type core body
temperature sensors. As a future prospect, we believe that more realistic
environmental assessments and verification using measured data are
necessary, and we plan to further improve and optimize our core temperature
estimation method to achieve higher accuracy.
Fig. 9. Spatial distribution of the absolute value (| dT/dt |) of the time derivative
of temperature calculated by each method at representative times when
temperature and wind velocity are rapidly changed. (a) Proposed method,
3 min elapsed. (b) Proposed method, 10 min elapsed. (c) Proposed method,
30 min elapsed. (d) Conventional method, 3 min elapsed. (e) Conventional
method, 10 min elapsed. (f) Conventional method, 30 min elapsed. (g) Time
variation of Tskin and Tsen calculated by each method.
Fig. 10. (a) A prototype based on the proposed method. (b) Time variation of wind velocity applied in evaluation experiments using the prototype. (c) Estimation
error in the conventional and proposed methods in the experiment. (d) Bland-Altman plots of reference and estimated core body temperature by the conventional and
proposed methods in the experiment.
Y. Hashimoto et al.
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical 368 (2024) 115136
7
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Nishida Yoshifumi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Resources. Tada Soto: Writing – review & editing, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Hashimoto Yuki: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Resources, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
23K19094.
References
[1] T. Deryugina, How do people update? The effects of local weather fluctuations on
beliefs about global warming, Clim. Change 118 (2013) 397–416.
[2] J.H. Diaz, The influence of global warming on natural disasters and their public
health outcomes, Am. J. Disaster Med. 2 (2007) 33–42.
[3] Y. Uchida, M. Izumizaki, Modulation of acyl and des-acyl ghrelin on autonomic and
behavioral thermoregulation in various ambient temperatures, J. Therm. Biol. 113
(2023) 103543.
[4] N.T. Toosty, A. Hagishima, K. Tanaka, Heat health risk assessment analysing
heatstroke patients in Fukuoka City, Japan, PLOS ONE 16 (2021) e0253011.
[5] T. Kamiya, R. Onishi, S. Kodera, A. Hirata, Estimation of time-course core
temperature and water loss in realistic adult and child models with urban
micrometeorology prediction, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16 (2019) 5097.
[6] A. Bouchama, J.P. Knochel, Heat stroke, N. Engl. J. Med. 346 (2002) 1978–1988.
[7] D.T. Lamarche, R.D. Meade, A.W. D’Souza, A.D. Flouris, S.G. Hardcastle, R.J. Sigal,
P. Boulay, G.P. Kenny, The recommended Threshold Limit Values for heat exposure
fail to maintain body core temperature within safe limits in older working adults,
J. Occup. Environ. Hyg. 14 (2017) 703–711.
[8] G.P. Kenny, S.R. Notley, A.D. Flouris, A. Grundstein, Climate Change and Heat
Exposure: Impact on Health in Occupational and General Populations, Impact on
Health in Occupational and General Populations. In: Adams, W., Jardine, J. (eds)
Exertional Heat Illness. Springer, Cham. (2019).
[9] K. Tokizawa, Heat-induced labor loss and growing global concerns in a warmer
world, Ind. Health 60 (2022) 499–500.
[10] K. Tokizawa, T. Shimuta, H. Tsuchimoto, Validity of a wearable core temperature
estimation system in heat using patch-type sensors on the chest, J. Therm. Biol. 108
(2022) 103294.
[11] K. Levels, J.J. de Koning, C. Foster, H.A.M. Daanen, The effect of skin temperature
on performance during a 7.5-km cycling time trial, Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 112
(2012) 3387–3395.
[12] Y. Hosokawa, W.M. Adams, R.L. Stearns, D.J. Casa, Comparison of gastrointestinal
and rectal temperatures during recovery after a warm-weather road race, J. Athl.
Train. 51 (2016) 382–388.
[13] H.A.M. Daanen, V. Kohlen, L.P.J. Teunissen, Heat flux systems for body core
temperature assessment during exercise, J. Therm. Biol. 112 (2023) 103480.
[14] S.R. Notley, R.D. Meade, G.P. Kenny, Time following ingestion does not influence
the validity of telemetry pill measurements of core temperature during exerciseheat
stress, J. Temperaure toolbox 8 (2021) 12–20.
[15] D.M. Wilkinson, J.M. Carter, V.L. Richmond, S.D. Blacker, M.P. Rayson, The effect
of cool water ingestion on gastrointestinal pill temperature, Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
40 (2008) 523–528.
[16] H.C. Gunga, M. Sandsund, R.E. Reinertsen, F. Sattler, J. Koch, A non-invasive
device to continuously determine heat strain in humans, J. Therm. Biol. 33 (2008)
297–307.
[17] H.C. Gunga, A. Werner, A. Stahn, M. Steinach, T. Schlabs, E. Koralewski, D. Kunz,
D.L. Belavý, D. Felsenberg, F. Sattler, J. Koch, The Double Sensor—a non-invasive
device to continuously monitor core temperature in humans on earth and in space,
Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 169 (2009) 563–568.
[18] K. Kitamura, X. Zhu, W. Chen, T. Nemoto, Development of a new method for the
noninvasive measurement of deep body temperature without a heater, Med. Eng.
Phys. 32 (2010) 1–6.
[19] S.Y. Kim, W.K. Lee, H.J. Baek, K.S. Park, A nonintrusive temperature measuring
system for estimating deep body temperature in bed, 2012 Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, (2012).
[20] Y. Zhang, R.C. Webb, H. Luo, Y. Xue, J. Kurniawan, N.H. Cho, S. Krishnan, Y. Li,
Y. Huang, J.A. Rogers, Theoretical and experimental studies of epidermal heat flux
sensors for measurements of core body temperature, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5 (2016)
119–127.
[21] M. Huang, T. Tamura, Z. Tang, W. Chen, S. Kanaya, A wearable thermometry for
core body temperature measurement and its experimental verification, IEEE J.
Biomed. Health Inform. 21 (2017) 708–714.
[22] D. Janke, N. Kagelmann, C. Storm, M.A. Maggioni, C. Kienast, H.-C. Gunga,
O. Opatz, Measuring core body temperaure using a non-invasive, disposable
double-sensor during targeted temperature management in post-cardiac arrest
patients, Front. Med. 8 (2021) 666908.
[23] A.P. Welles, X. Xu, W.R. Santee, D.P. Looney, M.J. Buller, A.W. Potter, R.W. Hoyt,
Estimation of core body temperature from skin temperature, heat flux, and heart
rate using a Kalman filter, Comput. Biol. Med. 99 (2018) 1–6.
[24] S. Morville, M. Carin, M. Muller, M. Gharbim P. Peyre, D. Carron, P. Lemasson, R.
Fabbro, 2D axial-symmetric model for fluid flow and heat transfer in the melting
and resolidification of a vertical cylinder, the Proceedings of the COMSOL
Conference 2010 Paris, (2010), 17–19.
[25] M.B. Turgay, A.G. Yazıcıo˘glu, Numerical simulation of fluid flow and heat transfer
in a trapezoidal microchannel with COMSOL multiphysics: a case study, Numer.
Heat. Transf.: Part A 73 (2018) 332–346.
[26] K. Mogi, Y. Hashimoto, T. Tsukahara, M. Terano, M. Yoshino, T. Yamamoto,
Nanometer-level high-accuracy molding using a photo-curable silicone elastomer
by suppressing thermal shrinkage, RSC Adv. 5 (2015) 10172–10177.
[27] K. Mogi, K. Sakata, Y. Hashimoto, T. Yamamoto, A novel fabrication technique for
liquid-tight microchannels by combination of a paraffin polymer and a photocurable
silicone elastomer, Materials 9 (2016) 621.
[28] Y. Hashimoto, K. Mogi, T. Yamamoto, Vacuum ultraviolet light assisted bonding
and nanoscale pattern transfer method for polydimethylsiloxane, Microelectron.
Eng. 176 (2017) 116–120.
[29] T. Okabe, T. Fujimura, J. Okajima, S. Aiba, S. Maruyama, Non-invasive
measurement of effective thermal conductivity of human skin with a guard-heated
thermistor probe, Int. J. Heat. Mass Transf. 126 (2018) 625–635.
[30] K. Ito, Y. Ban, S. Warisawa, Coldness presentation depending on motion to enhance
the sense of presence in a virtual underwater experience, IEEE Access 10 (2022)
23463–23476.
[31] A.M. El-Dakhakhny, A.F. Ahmed, S. El-Marsafy, E. Abadeer, Effect of adding fibers
and nano particles on the thermal and ablative properties of EPDM rubber thermal
insulators for solid rocket motor application, Int. J. Eng. Res. Technol. 6 (2017)
405–412.
[32] A. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Yu, W. Zheng, Y. Zhao, Largely enhanced thermal
conductivity of ethylene-propylene-diene monomer composites by addition of
graphene ball, Compos. Commun. 13 (2019) 119–124.
[33] F.J.M. Ruiz-Cabello, S. Bermúdez-Romero, P.F. Ib´a˜nez-Ib´a˜nez, M.A. Cabrerizo-
Vílchez, M.A. Rodríguez-Valverde, Freezing delay of sessile drops: Probing the
impact of contact angle, surface roughness and thermal conductivity, Appl. Surf.
Sci. 537 (2021) 147964.
[34] X. Zhang, H. Zhang, D. Li, H. Xu, Y. Huang, Y. Liu, D. Wu, J. Sun, Highly thermally
conductive and electrically insulating polydimethylsiloxane composites prepared
by ultrasonic-assisted forced infiltration for thermal management applications,
Compos. Part B: Eng. 224 (2021) 109207.
[35] M.I. Ralphs, N. Kemme, P.B. Vartak, E. Joseph, S. Tipnis, S. Turnage, K.N. Solanki,
R.Y. Wang, K. Rykaczewski, In Situ alloying of thermally conductive polymer
composites by combining liquid and solid metal microadditives, Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 10 (2018) 2083–2092.
[36] L.F. Mondolfo, Aluminum alloys: structure and properties, Elsevier, (1976).
[37] J.R. Davis, Aluminum and aluminum alloys, ASM international, (1993).
[38] A. Lombardi, F. D’Elia, C. Ravindran, R. MacKay, Replication of engine block
cylinder bridge microstructure and mechanical properties with lab scale 319 Al
alloy billet castings, Mater. Charact. 87 (2014) 125–137.
[39] R. Fei, S.R. Notley, E.A. Taylor, C.A. Burdon, N. Ohnishi, N.A.S. Taylor, Revisiting
the dermatomal recruitment of, and pressure-dependent influences on, human
eccrine sweating, J. Therm. Biol. 82 (2019) 52–62.
Yuki Hashimoto He received a B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. in engineering from Tokyo Institute
of Technology in 2013, 2015, and 2018. He joined NTT Device Innovation Center in 2018.
In 2023, he joined Tokyo Institute of Technology as a assistant professor, and is currently
researching wearable healthcare devices for management of heat stress. He is a member of
the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers and the Institute of Electrical Engineers of
Japan.
Soto Tada He is currently an undergraduate student at Tokyo Institute of Technology and
is engaged in research on wearable sensors for heat countermeasures.
Yoshifumi Nishida He received the PhD degree from the Graduate School of Mechanical
Engineering, University of Tokyo, in 1998. In 1998, he joined Intelligent System Division
of Electrotechnical Laboratory, Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI),
Japan. In 2001, he joined Digital Human Laboratory of the National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). From 2013 to 2019, he was also a prime senior
research scientist with AIST. In April 2019, he joined Tokyo Institute of Technology as a
professor. He is a member of the IEEE, Robotics Society of Japan, and the Japanese Society
of Artificial Intelligence.
Y. Hashimoto et al.