DETAILS
Distribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.
(Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Visit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:
– Access to free PDF downloads of thousands of scientific reports
– 10% off the price of print titles
– Email or social media notifications of new titles related to your interests
– Special offers and discounts



GET THIS BOOK
FIND RELATED TITLES
This PDF is available at SHARE
CONTRIBUTORS
   
SUGGESTED CITATION
http://nap.edu/27136
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health
Professions Education: Proceedings of a Workshop (2023)
116 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACK
ISBN 978-0-309-70604-9 | DOI 10.17226/27136
Patricia A. Cuff and Erin Hammers Forstag, Rapporteurs; Global Forum on
Innovation in Health Professional Education; Board on Global Health; Health and
Medicine Division; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2023. Addressing the
Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings
of a Workshop. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
https://doi.org/10.17226/27136.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Proceedings of a Workshop
Patricia A. Cuff and
Erin Hammers Forstag, Rapporteurs
Global Forum on Innovation in
Health Professional Education
Board on Global Health
Health and Medicine Division
Addressing the Needs
of an Aging Population
Through Health
Professions Education
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001
This activity was supported by contracts between the National Academy of
Sciences and Academic Collaborative for Integrative Health, Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics, Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education,
American Academy of Nursing, American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic
Medicine, American Board of Family Medicine, American Council of Academic
Physical Therapy, American Dental Education Association, American Medical
Association, American Nurses Credentialing Center, American Occupational
Therapy Association, American Physical Therapy Association, American
Psychological Association, American Speech-Language-Hearing Association,
Association of American Medical Colleges, Association of Schools and Colleges
of Optometry, Association of Schools of Advancing Health Professions, Athletic
Training Strategic Alliance, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Council on Social Work Education, the George Washington
University, Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation, National Academies of Practice,
National Association of Social Workers, National Board for Certified Counselors
and Affiliates, National Board of Medical Examiners, National Council of State
Boards of Nursing, National League for Nursing, Physician Assistant Education
Association, Society for Simulation in Healthcare, Texas A&M University–San
Antonio, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, and Weill Cornell Medicine–Qatar. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not
necessarily reflect the views of any organization or agency that provided support
for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-70604-9
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-70604-1
Digital Object Identifier: https://doi.org/10.17226/27136
This publication is available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street,
NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313;
http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2023 by the National Academy of Sciences. National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and National Academies Press and the
graphical logos for each are all trademarks of the National Academy of Sciences.
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
2023. Addressing the needs of an aging population through health professions
education: Proceedings of a workshop. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/27136.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 by an Act of
Congress, signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution
to advise the nation on issues related to science and technology. Members are
elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Marcia
McNutt is president.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964 under the
charter of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering
to advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary
contributions to engineering. Dr. John L. Anderson is president.
The National Academy of Medicine (formerly the Institute of Medicine)
was established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences
to advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau
is president.
The three Academies work together as the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and
advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and
inform public policy decisions. The National Academies also encourage education
and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase
public understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine.
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine at www.nationalacademies.org.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Consensus Study Reports published by the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine document the evidence-based consensus on the
study’s statement of task by an authoring committee of experts. Reports typically
include findings, conclusions, and recommendations based on information
gathered by the committee and the committee’s deliberations. Each report
has been subjected to a rigorous and independent peer-review process and it
represents the position of the National Academies on the statement of task.
Proceedings published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop,
symposium, or other event convened by the National Academies. The statements
and opinions contained in proceedings are those of the participants and are
not endorsed by other participants, the planning committee, or the National
Academies.
Rapid Expert Consultations published by the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine are authored by subject-matter experts
on narrowly focused topics that can be supported by a body of evidence. The
discussions contained in rapid expert consultations are considered those of the
authors and do not contain policy recommendations. Rapid expert consultations
are reviewed by the institution before release.
For information about other products and activities of the National Academies,
please visit www.nationalacademies.org/about/whatwedo.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
v
PLANNING COMMITTEE ON
ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION
THROUGH HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION1
DONNA FERGUSON (Cochair), Department of Defense
ANDREA PFEIFLE (Cochair), National Academies of Practice
NICOLE ANSELME, Strategic Healthcare Programs LLC
RICARDO CUSTODIO, University of Hawaii West O’ahu
ELIZABETH GOLDBLATT, Strategic Healthcare Programs, LLC
GREG HARTLEY, University of Miami
JENNIFER KIM, Vanderbilt University School of Nursing
KATHRYN KOLASA, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University
CATHY MAXWELL, Vanderbilt University School of Nursing
LAUREN MAZZURCO, Eastern Virginia Medical School
SENTHIL RAJASEKARAN, Khalifa University College of Medicine and
Health Sciences
JOANNE SCHWARTZBERG, American Medical Association
ZOHRAY TALIB, California University of Science and Medicine
Learners and Consultants to the Planning Committee
RIHAM ABU AFFAN, Khalifa University
LILY BRICKMAN, University of Maine
DARLA SPENCE COFFEY, Council on Social Work Education
REBECCA GEORGE, University of California Davis
BROOKE HAZEN, Vanderbilt University School of Nursing
CHERYL HOYING, National League for Nursing
1 The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s forums and roundtables
do not issue, review, or approve individual documents. The responsibility for the published
Proceedings of a Workshop rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
vii
Reviewers
This Proceedings of a Workshop was reviewed in draft form by individuals
chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The
purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments
that will assist the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine in making each published proceedings as sound as possible and to
ensure that it meets the institutional standards for quality, objectivity, evidence,
and responsiveness to the charge. The review comments and draft
manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the process.
We thank the following individuals for their review of this proceedings:
CATHY A. MAXWELL, Vanderbilt University
DARLA SPENCE COFFEY, (Rtd) Council on Social Work Education
Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments
and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the
proceedings nor did they see the final draft before its release. The review
of this proceedings was overseen by DEBORAH E. POWELL, University
of Minnesota. She was responsible for making certain that an independent
examination of this proceedings was carried out in accordance with standards
of the National Academies and that all review comments were carefully
considered. Responsibility for the final content rests entirely with the
rapporteurs and the National Academies.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ix
Contents
1 Introduction and Framing of the Issues 1
2 Exploring What Matters Most in Working with Older Adults 17
3 Supply and Demand: Is the Workforce Prepared to Meet the
Needs of Older Adults? 29
4 Addressing the Gap 41
5 Making It Happen with Implementation Science 57
APPENDIXES
A References 69
B Members of the Global Forum on Innovation in Health
Professional Education 73
C Workshop Agenda 81
D Planning Committee and Speaker Biographies 87
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
1
Introduction1 and Framing of the Issues
The Global Forum on Innovation in Health Professional Education2
at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine held
a workshop on Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population through
Health Professions Education on December 7–8, 2022. A pre-workshop
session took place on November 15, 2022, to introduce the topic through
an implementation science lens. Although there was an option to attend
the workshop in person in Washington, D.C., participants primarily joined
virtually. The workshop and pre-workshop agendas were planned by an
expert planning committee (see Appendix D) whose work was guided by a
Statement of Task (Box 1-1).
Of note is that these proceedings are organized by subject area, rather
than chronologically (see Agenda in Appendix C). Chapter 1 opens with
a framing discussion focused on the perspectives and needs of patients.
This brief introduction is followed by presentations and discussions about
working with older adults, learner reluctance to work with older adults,
and speakers’ views on applying the World Health Organization’s intrinsic
capacity framework within and across health professions. Chapter 2 presents
discussions about educating learners on aging across the life course and
1 The planning committee’s role was limited to planning the workshop, and this Proceedings
of a Workshop was prepared by the rapporteurs as a factual account of what occurred at
the workshop. Statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those of individual
presenters and participants and are not necessarily endorsed or verified by the National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. They should not be construed as reflecting any
group consensus.
2 See Appendix B for a full list of forum members and staff.
1
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
2 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
summarizes a presentation on an age-friendly health education tool. Chapter
3 explores the question of whether the current health workforce supply
is adequate to meet the needs of an aging population. Chapter 4 explores
ways to address the gap between supply and demand, with summaries of
presentations on a variety of approaches currently in use. Chapter 5 closes
the proceedings with a description of implementation science and how it
can help health professions education develop evidence-based approaches
for building a workforce that is eager and prepared to work with older
adults.
FRAMING THE ISSUES
Key Messages from the Presenters3
• Health professions education programs do not require classes in
geriatrics, and it can be difficult to get programs to even offer elective
opportunities to gain experience in geriatric care. (Pfeifle)
3 This list is the rapporteurs’ summary of points made by individual speakers, and the statements
have not been endorsed or verified by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine. They are not intended to reflect a consensus among workshop participants.
BOX 1-1
Statement of Task
A planning committee of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine will organize and conduct a public workshop to explore the many
and varied needs of an aging population and an ideal health workforce that could
match those identified population needs in terms of numbers and skillset. Further
discussion will include expert opinions on who will make up the health workforce,
training requirements for each level of care provider, who will provide the training
and education, and in what setting the training will take place. Learning from
global examples can shed light on new ways of addressing shared challenges
with aging such as mental health functioning, physical functioning, persistent pain,
multi-morbidity, and polypharmacy. How social determinants of health impact a
healthy aging process and payment structures to care for a growing older population
are equally important areas to consider.
The planning committee will select and invite speakers and discussants
and moderate the discussions at the workshop. Following the workshop, a proceedings
of the presentations and discussions will be prepared by a designated
rapporteur
in accordance with institutional guidelines.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 3
• Giving older adults the opportunity to be engaged in the community
and to help other people is an essential part of healthy aging.
(Newton)
• The “elephant in the room” is the need for a paradigm shift in how
students are taught to think about older adults and the ideas that
shape our attitudes. (Maxwell)
• At the learner level, it is important to move students into the community
and learn from older adults directly. (Talib)
Andrea Pfeifle, the associate vice president for interprofessional practice
and education for The Ohio State University and Wexner Medical Center,
and Donna Ferguson, the mental health and wellness program manager at
the Department of the Army Criminal Investigations Command in the Department
of Defense, welcomed participants to the workshop by highlighting
the importance of building the health care workforce to be prepared to
care for the needs of older adults. An implementation science lens, Pfeifle
said, is a useful approach for discussing how to make the necessary changes
in health professions education. She noted that most health professions
education programs do not require classes in geriatrics and said that it can
be difficult to get these health professions education programs to even offer
elective opportunities for students to gain experience in geriatric care.
The December 7 workshop session began with a conversation among
Pfeifle, Ferguson, and community members Nancy Cruz and Willie Ann
Burroughs.
Pfeifle said that when exploring ways to inspire learners to
pursue training and education in the care of older adults, it is critical
to keep the focus on the “captain of the ship”—that is, on the older
adults themselves who are in a position to make their own life decisions.
Ferguson
added that a team-based approach is important in both education
and care and that the center of the team is the patient. Ferguson asked
Cruz and Burroughs
to tell workshop participants about themselves, their
lives, and their work.
Cruz lives in Queens, New York. After a career working as a nurse
in both a hospital and in a school, she now volunteers at the local senior
center.
She takes seniors’ blood pressure readings and listens to their problems;
she added that some seniors at the center are “so lonely” and that
just being there to listen is “such a big deal for them.” Cruz said that at
mealtime some of the seniors want to maintain their independence and “eat
what they want to eat.” She coaches them to try new things but also understands
that every once in a while they need a special treat of something they
are not supposed to have, “even if the doctor doesn’t like it.” Cruz said
she gets around mostly on foot and is able to walk to the supermarket and
many other stores. There are plenty of buses available if she needs to travel
farther, such as to the doctor. As a former nurse, Cruz said she is able to
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
4 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
communicate easily with her doctors and understand their lingo, but some
of the seniors whom she helps cannot. Cruz encourages the seniors to speak
up and ask their doctors for what they need. In offering some observations
about the health care system in general, Cruz said that most nurses today do
not have the time with patients that she had when she was a young nurse;
nurses are overwhelmed with 10 to 15 patients and are likely to miss signs
and symptoms that are important. Young nurses need support from older
nurses and more time with patients, she said; without this support, the
system loses many good nurses.
Burroughs lives in Thomasville, Alabama. She drives herself to doctor
appointments in Mobile and to visit her children in Birmingham, Mobile,
and other places. She helps to care for two “young ladies”; one is 86 years
old, and the other is 101 years old. Burroughs helps them with cooking,
cleaning, getting to the doctor, and just getting out of the house. She helps
them remember when to take their medications and how to follow their
doctors’ instructions. Burroughs said that helping these ladies is “very
rewarding.” Their children live in different cities, and Burroughs is often
the only person nearby for them to talk to. When Burroughs goes out of
town, she asks her relatives to step in and check on the ladies and see what
they need. By cooking for the ladies, Burroughs has learned what they like.
The 86-year-old, for example, loves bacon and croissants, cherry-cola, and
caramel chocolate candy bars, and Burroughs said she has to hide the candy
bars because otherwise the 86-year-old will eat them all at once. To take
care of her own health, Burroughs goes to the gym three days a week and
drinks fruit and vegetable smoothies for breakfast. Burroughs has to drive a
considerable distance to see a specialist and said that she wishes there were
more specialists available near her small town.
Warren Newton, the president and chief executive officer for the American
Board of Family Medicine, observed that both Burroughs and Cruz
embody the importance of social engagement and meaningful roles. Giving
older adults the opportunity to be engaged in the community and to help
other people is an essential part of healthy aging. Another workshop participant,
Zohray Talib, the senior associate dean of academic affairs at the
California University of Science and Medicine, added that in her work in
Uganda and Kenya she has observed older people staying purposeful and
engaged in their communities. There is a sense of community and support
around older adults, and issues such as dementia are not pathologized but
treated as normal behaviors. Talib described how a Kenyan woman spoke
about her 90-year-old mother-in-law, who lives in a rural village and is
busy with a sense of purpose and surrounded by family and grandchildren.
However, Talib said, as people in these countries move to cities and become
geographically dispersed, aging with a sense of purpose has become more
difficult.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 5
WORKING WITH OLDER ADULTS
Ricardo Custodio is a pediatrician and professor of health sciences
based in Hawai’i. Hawai’i is a special place, Custodio said. It is geographically
isolated, which has resulted in having an enormously biodiverse
ecosystem and one of the most diverse, multiethnic, and multicultural
populations in the world. There are a few Hawai’ian values that have
been key to surviving and thriving, he said: aloha (love), malama (caring),
and ’ohana (family). These values are expressed when you give the gift of
flower lei to celebrate special occasions, including birthdays, weddings,
graduations, and goodbyes. The elderly, called “kupuna,” are celebrated in
Hawai’i, he said. Custodio joked that you are officially elderly in Hawai’i
when a cashier calls you “auntie” or “uncle” and automatically gives you
the 10 percent discount. According to Custodio, the merging of Asian and
Pacific Islander cultures means that “we malama our kupuna,” or care for
our elderly, because this is what ’ohana (family) does. He added that homes
in Hawai’i are twice as likely to be multigenerational or more crowded than
the national U.S. average, underscoring the concept of ’ohana, and “family
means no one gets left behind or forgotten.”
The values of aloha, malama, and ’ohana, Custodio said, are reflected
in the fact that people living in Hawai’i have the longest life expectancy and
are the happiest people in the United States (Arias et al., 2018; Mitchell et
al., 2013). “We must be doing something differently and right to live longer
and be happier,” he said. The priority is to care for elders at home with
the support of family and community, and it is a longstanding expectation
that kupuna stay at home with their families. However, he added, not all
people in Hawai’i enjoy this support. For example, when Custodio was a
medical student in the emergency room, there was an elderly woman who
would come in several times a week just to “talk story.” She was the mother
of a rich developer, but her son and grandchildren never came to visit; all
the money in the world could not prevent her from being lonely, he said.
Custodio said he has spent his career trying to serve those who have been
left behind, with a focus on providing health care to underserved children and
families. His patients are primarily the poor, Pacific Islanders, and recently
arrived non-English-speaking immigrants. For over 40 years Custodio
has
worked in community health centers that provide comprehensive services
beyond primary care, regardless of patients’ ability to pay. These services include
homeless outreach, assistance with insurance eligibility, transportation,
and translation as well as support from community health workers. More
importantly, he said, these centers provide clerkships and training for health
professions students to help them understand and experience
what it is like
to work in a community. The hope is to “brainwash” them into staying and
committing to serve, he said. Over the last 12 years, Custodio has helped
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
6 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
start a medical school, a nurse practitioner residency program, a clinical
psychology
fellowship, and a university division of natural and health sciences;
all are focused on poor and underserved communities. These programs
are part of his efforts focused on “growing our own, from our community,
for our community.” There are a huge number of health professions careers,
and many are among the fastest growing occupations in the country. Training
young people in these careers is a way to get underserved students into
professions that can pay a living wage, he said.
Custodio noted that health professions training is often conducted in
siloes and that upon entering practice, professionals are “thrown together”
and expected to work like a team from day one. In sports, individuals
learn individual skills but also spend dedicated time practicing and playing
together as a team. “Why doesn’t that happen in medicine?” he asked. He
encouraged stakeholders to create a model of health professions education
that consistently reminds students of the values of professionalism,
teamwork, and service to the community. Clinical training centers should
be created where students are given interprofessional health education
directly in underserved communities. As an example of interprofessional
training, Custodio spoke of how in the early 1990s a grant-funded project
brought together medical, nursing, social work, and public health students
for weekly sessions in a community health center. This experience instilled
a sense of “community heart” in these students, he said.
Custodio also described a recent experience he had that showed him
the power of love, caring, and family. He was hospitalized because he was
urinating blood. He was in the hospital for several days receiving treatment,
which gave him “a lot of time to think,” he said. One reassuring insight he
had concerned the strength of the community around him: the urologist was
his former medical school classmate, the hospitalist was his former medical
student, and the evening nurse was a former patient. The connections and
support that he felt at his hospital gave him a sense that his community
was rooting for him. The challenge, he said, is how to teach this to the next
generation of health care providers. Where are the role models, and how
can patients be guided to teach students about family and community? This
is increasingly important to Custodio, he said, as he recently turned 65 and
enrolled in Medicare.
Custodio discussed a number of trends relevant to the workshop. There
is an increase in the number of older adults needing health care, while at
the same time there is a decrease in the overall health care workforce due to
retirement, death, and burnout. There is an increase in the amount of health
care delivered at home rather than at hospitals and clinics. An interesting
recent trend, he said, is that 85 to 90 percent of students going into health
care are female, many of whom are immigrants, first-generation Americans,
and minorities. This trend is in part due to the not-so-subtle advertising to
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 7
caring, compassionate, and impressionable little girls; Custodio shared a
picture of the wide variety of girl-oriented doctor toys and dolls that are
available. This, he said, is how we make doctors. A more nurturing and caring
workforce will change medicine for the better. The challenge for health
professions education is to help young people define a purpose beyond the
goal of acquiring material possessions and making money and toward social
equity and justice, beyond the struggle for subsistence and toward
serving
others and building a sense of trust and hope for our kupuna.
During the pandemic, Custodio said that he felt this type of purpose
and urgency in the younger generation. His clinic received a grant to train
community contact tracers, with a focus on serving vulnerable populations;
they had over 3,000 applications for 150 slots. Grades and degrees were important
in choosing applicants, but the priority was to find candidates who
had “community heart.” Custodio described community heart as the “one
kid who stays back and helps clean up” after everyone leaves a big family
gathering. As health professions educators move forward in addressing the
needs of an aging population, he said, there is a need to understand how
individuals’ development and their foundation of family and community
affect their health and wellness. Providers need to actively encourage and
seek out health professions candidates who have community heart, purpose,
and desire to serve. The future that Custodio envisions is one in which older
adults are healthy and are not alone because family and community are
integrated into their care.
LEARNER RELUCTANCE
The global older adult population will double by 2050, said Cathy
Maxwell of the Vanderbilt University School of Nursing. In the United
States, the proportion of older adults will grow from 16 percent in 2021
to 22 percent in 2050 (ACL, 2021; WHO, 2022). In anticipation of this
growth, the Institute of Medicine published a report in 2008 called Retooling
for an Aging America: Building a Healthcare Workforce (IOM, 2008).
Unfortunately, Maxwell said, the report did not have the desired impact. In
fact, there has been a solid decline in geriatricians and nurse practitioners
who work with older adults. Despite this report and other national initiatives—
including the Eldercare Workforce Alliance, the Geriatric Workforce
Enhancement Program, and the Nurses Improving Care for Health System
Elders Program—the barriers to working with older adults have not been
addressed. Maxwell reviewed a number of recent publications on aging
adults and the health care workforce in order to lay a foundation for the
rest of the workshop.
In April 2021, Nature Aging published a comment by John Rowe of
Columbia University on the state of the U.S. eldercare workforce (Rowe,
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
8 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
2021). The piece included three major recommendations to improve the
care of older adults, Maxwell said. First, Rowe urged a dramatic increase
in the number of geriatric health care professionals, with a focus on public
health professionals. Second, he advocated for population-focused and
evidence-based policies and programs to support well-being. Third, Rowe
addressed the need to implement recently formulated consensus recommendations
regarding the care of community-dwelling older adults with serious
illness. These recommendations included incorporating family members,
applying technology, advancing cultural competency, and refining payment
models.
One of the major barriers to expanding the workforce and improving
the care of older adults, Maxwell said, is ageism among health care professionals
as well as among older adults themselves. A study published in
2020 reported that not only does ageism exist, but it is well-established,
socially accepted, and prevalent throughout the Western world (Chang et
al., 2020). The study’s authors advocated for educational interventions
among clinicians to increase awareness of ageism, additional education
and training to improve knowledge about aging, and research to explore
factors related to the phenomenon of ageism among older adults. A 2019
special issue of the Journal of the American Geriatric Society addressed
consensus-based recommendations for an adequate workforce, noting the
need to use interprofessional teams; connect social, clinical, and home care
services; build a culturally competent workforce; and train clinicians with
appropriate communication skills (Spetz and Dudley, 2019). The special
issue also emphasized the importance of the home care workforce, family
caregiving, and palliative care.
A 2020 systematic review examined factors related to the preferences
of students for working with older adults, Maxwell said (Hebditch et al.,
2020). The review synthesized 62 papers and identified seven categories of
factors that influence preferences, including student characteristics, experiences,
courses, career, patient characteristics, and work characteristics.
Maxwell described several key findings. First, during student training programs
the preference for working with older adults actually decreases. The
socialization process during these programs is seen as a deterrent and was
referred to as a “hidden curriculum.” The review noted there was a lack of
educational interventions to address this hidden curriculum. A second key
finding was that students had certain perceptions about the work, patients,
and careers associated with working with older adults. Negative perceptions
included a feeling that the work would be boring or emotionally challenging,
the focus on quality of life rather than on curing patients, difficulties
communicating with patients, and negative patient dispositions. Finally, the
review identified the importance of exposure to healthy adults in order to
reduce stereotypical prejudices and to promote working with older adults.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 9
The National Hartford Center for Gerontological Nursing Excellence
published core competencies for gerontological nursing educators in 2019
(NHCGNE, 2019). According to these findings, nursing educators should:
• Maintain knowledge and skills in the care of older adults
• Serve as advocates and positive role models for quality care for
older adults
• Implement innovative teaching strategies for engaging learners to
develop knowledge, attitudes, and skills for supporting healthy aging
and the care of older adults
• Facilitate interprofessional learning opportunities related to healthy
aging and care of older adults
• Facilitate the integration of concepts of healthy aging and care of
older adults in academic and professional development programs
• Collaborate in the evaluation of learning about healthy aging and
care of older adults in academic and professional development
programs
• Demonstrate scholarship and leadership that advances gerontological
nursing education and practice and that fosters others’ professional
development.
The “elephant in the room,” Maxwell said, is the need for a paradigm
shift in how students are taught to think about older adults and the ideas
that shape our attitudes. Traditionally, she said, older adults are portrayed
as frail, with fixed ideas of young versus old. There is a need to change
learner attitudes about aging, Maxwell stated, before adding, “we don’t
have another decade to figure it out.” Compounding the issue, she said,
teachers are unlikely to engage in the type of collective change that is
needed because of three factors: presentism, conservatism, and individualism.
In a 1975 publication, Lortie described presentism as a focus on the
short term, conservatism as a focus on small-scale achievements rather than
broad change, and individualism as an idea that is reinforced by jobs with
uncertain criteria for successful performance and reliance on their own
indicators in isolation of a broader agenda (Nash and Ducharme, 1975).
Implementation science, to be discussed later, offers a path forward,
Maxwell said. Implementation science is the study of the methods and
strategies that facilitate the uptake of evidence-based practice and research
into regular use by practitioners and policy makers (see Chapter 5 for more
details). Maxwell said that a broader, holistic approach is needed in order
to acknowledge the reality that aging is a process that begins early in life.
The mechanisms of aging take place over decades, and most people have
a long period with clinically healthy status. Once age-related pathologies
appear, it is often too late to reverse the mechanisms of biological aging due
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
10 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
to a lack of compensatory mechanisms and physiologic reserve. Maxwell
compared the process to an iceberg, in which age-related pathologies are
only the tip (Figure 1-1). There is a need, she said, to advance the understanding
that aging is a continuum that begins around age 30, with a slow
and incremental decline that is largely unnoticeable in younger and middle
years. Later discussions at the workshop would focus more closely on how
to shift attitudes and perceptions among learners in order to improve the
capacity of the health care workforce to care for older adults.
INTRINSIC CAPACITY FRAMEWORK
The World Health Organization (WHO) articulated a vision for aging
in 2016 (WHO, 2017). This vision, Maxwell said, represented a shift
FIGURE 1-1 Iceberg model of aging.
SOURCES: Maxwell presentation, December 7, 2022; Franceschi et al. 2018.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 11
away from thinking about health in older age as the presence or absence
of disease and toward looking at functional ability. In addition, the vision
endorsed the need for countries to cater more effectively to the needs of
older people and to provide health services and care in a more integrated
way. The intrinsic capacity (IC) framework comprises cognition, mobility,
psychological, vitality, and sensory functions (Figure 1-2) (Zhou and Ma,
2022). Maxwell said that while this framework holds promise for mitigating
functional decline, chronic conditions, and early mortality, it may
not fully address other factors that contribute to harmonious aging. The
harmonious aging approach, she explained, is designed to recognize the
challenges and opportunities of old age, the tension between activity and
disengagement, the integrity of the body and mind, and the interdependent
nature of human beings. With this in mind, she, along with others involved
in planning the workshop, suggested adding several factors to the intrinsic
capacity framework: social, family, community, cultural, and spiritual. A
roundtable of health professionals, students, and other stakeholders discussed
the expanded IC framework and whether it is the right model to
guide health care professionals in the care of older adults.
FIGURE 1-2 The World Health Organization’s intrinsic capacity model for aging.
SOURCES: Presented by Maxwell, December 7, 2022; Cesari et al., 2018.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
12 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Integrative Health and Medicine Perspective
The IC model is an excellent one, said Liza Goldblatt, the director
of national and global projects at the Academy of Integrative Health and
Medicine, but it does focus mostly on the biological factors for aging.
There are many other important areas that affect healthy aging, including
social, cultural, community, economics, and family factors. Goldblatt said
there are two movements that blend the IC model with the core values that
Custodio discussed, such as family ties and cultural traditions. The first is
the whole health movement, which began at the Department of Veterans
Affairs and focuses on the whole person, including asking individuals what
matters most to them and what their health priorities are. The second is
the integrative health movement, which consists of conventional medicine
providers working together with complementary medicine. Professionals
in this movement include conventional medicine practitioners as well as
acupuncturists, chiropractors, naturopathic physicians, Chinese medicine
practitioners, and licensed massage therapists. Each of these disciplines
addresses healthy aging and well-being as well as the treatment of diseases
and conditions. These two movements, Goldblatt said, address the body,
the mind, the emotions, the spirit, and the environment.
In 2014, a study found that over 30 percent of the U.S. population
has access to integrated health care and that this percentage is even higher
for seniors (Siddiqui et al., 2014). Since 2018 the Joint Commission has
required hospitals to discuss non-pharmacological treatment of pain with
patients. For example, patients who do not wish to be heavily sedated
for pain management may be able to use acupuncture instead. Other
options to improve the well-being of seniors include tai chi, chi gong,
chiropractic
care, mindfulness training, and nutritional strategies. However,
conventional medical systems are still largely unaware of these disciplines,
their philosophies, and their scopes of practice. This is a significant gap
in health professions education and practice in the United States. The current
health care system, Goldblatt said, is not set up for optimal health and
well-being. It is designed more for the treatment of diseases, which, while
being an important part of health care, is limited. Since so many diseases
are preventable, she asked, is it not time to also put the country’s economic
resources towards supporting the creation of good health? Health professionals
are dedicated and motivated, but they simply cannot address the
needs of patients
in 15-minute visits in a for-profit medical system. As Cruz
observed in the first session of the workshop, health professionals are not
given the time they need with patients. “We need to change our health care
system” if there will be any impact on the health and well-being of the aging
population, Goldblatt said.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 13
Nutrition Perspective
Food and nutrition touch all of the five original domains of the IC
framework as well as the factors that the planning committee suggested
adding, said Kathy Kolasa, a professor emerita at East Carolina University’s
Brody School of Medicine. While not everyone can share the beautiful
flowers of Hawai’i, she said, people around the globe share food with
their families and friends as a way of expressing love and caring. Food is
an important component of the IC framework, although it is rarely mentioned
in the literature. Kolasa gave three reasons why nutrition should
be considered in all domains of the IC framework. First, frailty and malnutrition
are established risk factors for loss of function (Cesari et al.,
2018). Roughly 22 percent of older adults in the hospital and approximately
30 percent of those in long-term care are malnourished, which has
an impact on their recovery and function. Second, activities of daily living
(ADLs) are discussed in the IC literature, but there is a need for more
emphasis on the instrumental ADLs, such as accessing and preparing food
(Zhou and Ma, 2022). Health professionals can screen for food insecurity
in clinical settings and can help connect people to the resources they need.
Dietitians can counsel patients on how to get a good-quality diet, which is
important for retaining function. Third, Kolasa said, many chronic disease
conditions have a nutrition component, and about 50 percent of older
Americans are obese (Jimenez et al., 2022). The standard advice given to
young people for weight loss may not be effective for older adults and could
even lead to loss of function. Registered dietitian nutritionists can conduct
nutritional assessments
and promote the adoption of preventive strategies
for aging that address frailty, disability, and other issues that matter most
to older adults. Kolasa said that weight loss is sometimes discouraged for
older adults because of fears of making function worse, but the things that
matter most to older adults often require weight loss. For example, an individual
may want to run around with his or her grandchildren or get up off
the floor independently. Weight loss can be done safely and appropriately
and should not be discouraged for this population, Kolasa said. She added
that a focus on function for older adults can be an opportunity to bring
together professionals from different specialties; for example, occupational
therapy students and dietetic students could work together to help patients
use adaptive tools to cook and eat healthy meals.
Medical Perspective
The model of care in both the United States and around the world is
disease-centered, said Senthil Rajasekaran, the associate dean and chief
academic officer at Khalifa University College of Medicine and Health
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
14 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Sciences. However, for the geriatric population in particular, the ideal
model of care is function-centered, with an emphasis on issues that matter
to the individual. Functional ability is determined primarily by the intrinsic
capacity—that is, the composite of all of the physical and mental capacities
of the individual—along with the environment. The five domains of the IC
framework are pivotal for capturing an individual’s intrinsic capacity, he
said. Unfortunately, he added, the health professions education system does
not adequately address these topics or focus on function-based care. The
growth in the population of older adults is not being matched by a growth
in relevant areas of health education. It is critical, he said, that the health
professions education system “takes a huge stride” in including a significant
amount of educational material that will help learners be prepared to take
care of the elderly population when they enter clinical practice. There are
a variety of methods to introduce this content, he said, including simulations,
gamification, and opportunities for students to “roll up their sleeves”
and work in the community with older adults. The current generation is
motivated
to make an impact in their community, Rajasekaran said, so
there need to be opportunities for them to do so.
Learner Perspective
A doctoral student in nursing practice within adult geriatrics at
Vanderbilt
University, Brooke Hazen commented that there is not much
emphasis on the duty within the health care system to serve others. Specifically,
she said, patients are seen as separate from providers, and providers
do not see taking care of patients as a way of making their own lives
better.
Hazen said that while there have been many efforts to improve the
health care system—for example, to make it more cost-effective or more
evidence-based—there is a need for a mindset shift toward a value-based
system. Health professionals need to be given the time and training to act as
patient advocates, and they need to think of themselves as advocates. The
“whole country” needs to push back on our current system, she said, and
demand a change. As a student, Hazen said, she has had the opportunity
to meet with patients for long periods of time, to listen to their issues, and
to identify multiple ways that their health and care could be improved. No
one else in the system is catching these things, she said, because they simply
do not have the time to see the big picture. There is a need for a major
shift within health professions education and practice in order to provide
patient-centered care that addresses the whole person.
Hazen also spoke of the importance of interprofessional training and
practice. Part of her nurse practitioner training included a 2-year clinical
program in which nursing students worked on teams that included medical,
pharmacy, social work, divinity, and counseling students. The teams
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION AND FRAMING OF THE ISSUES 15
worked in clinics and also visited older adults in their homes. Hazen
emphasized the value of this interprofessional training, saying it was the
highlight moment for her in terms of how she provides care and how she
sees health care.
Community Perspective
Zohray Talib of the California University of Science and Medicine
agreed with other speakers about the need for a cultural shift within the
health care system. The question, she said, is what will this mean for health
professions educators and what actions need to be taken? Talib described
three levels at which changes need to be made. First, at the macro level there
is a need for new policies and an evolution of accreditation and regulatory
requirements. These changes cannot wait, she said, because the demographic
shift is already happening. At the institutional level, institutions
need to be responsive to the needs of an aging population and should incorporate
the perspective of older individuals in leadership and governance.
Furthermore, many educators themselves are older adults, so institutions
need to be thinking about issues such as retirement and burnout. At the
learner level, students need to move into the community and learn from
older adults directly. Talib said that the discussions at the workshop have
made her feel inspired, but she also feels a sense of urgency to act. There
is a need to start visualizing what success looks like and what steps can be
taken to get there, she concluded.
Psychology Perspective
Health professions education often focuses on disease, said Catherine
Grus, the chief education officer at the American Psychological Association,
but there is a need to shift the perspective toward health promotion. Training
health professionals to think about how to promote health and wellbeing
in older adults can make a big impact, she said. For example, several
speakers mentioned the issue of loneliness in older adults. Loneliness can
progress to depression, and there are high rates of suicide in older adults
(Crestani et al., 2019). Taking a health promotion perspective can lead one
to intervene early and mitigate against the progression of the depression.
However, the current health care workforce does not have the capacity
to take this approach, she said, and educators are “not going to get there
overnight.” Another critical piece of caring for older adults, Grus added, is
using an interdisciplinary approach and working closely with professionals
across the spectrum. For example, if an individual presents with symptoms
of depression, it is imperative to work with other professionals to discern
whether the depression is related to a medical condition or perhaps is an
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
16 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
early stage of cognitive decline. In psychology in particular, she said, there
is a lack of emphasis on health promotion and the role of communities in
promoting and supporting well-being.
Social Work Perspective
The IC framework fits nicely with the social work perspective, said
Nancy Kusmaul of the University of Maryland School of Social Work. For
generations, social work has taught the person and environment model,
which looks at the interaction between the environment and the individual’s
strengths and challenges, including physical, mental, cognitive, emotional,
and spiritual issues. The problem, however, is getting social work students
interested in working with older adults. Offering separate classes on older
adults is not particularly effective, she said, because the only students who
enroll are those who are already interested in working with this population.
Kusmaul added that while students may say they want to work with
families and children, they do not generally think about the fact that older
adults are part of families. Connecting students with older adults through
the classroom or practical experiences, she said, is one approach to get
students interested. She commented on hearing from multiple practitioners
that “accidental experience” with older adults is what got them interested
in the field. Kusmaul urged health professions educators to think of ways
to expose students to older adults in order to spark interest and improve
care for this population.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Key Messages Made by Presenters
• The first step of the process [in the course] is for students to get
to know older adults and to understand what matters to them.
(Lynch)
• The four Ms in the program stand for what matters, medication,
mentation (mental activity and stimulation), and mobility. Students
should be taught early about the four Ms and how they will be
expected to deliver 4Ms care both during and after their education.
(Pohnert, Dolansky)
Multiple individual speakers at the workshop emphasized the importance
of focusing on what matters most to older adults. In the two sessions
described in this chapter, presenters discussed programs that seek to do so.
The first presentation described a course in which students work closely
with older adults in the community to address some of their challenges. The
second presentation described the 4Ms approach for age-friendly health
systems and explains how it was implemented at CVS MinuteClinics.
ENGINEERING FOR HUMANITY
People are at the center of everything, said Caitrin Lynch, the dean
of faculty and a professor of anthropology at Olin College of Engineering.
When innovating or trying to make change, it is critical to “hold on
to what really matters to people” and create things that are relevant and
2
Exploring What Matters Most in
Working with Older Adults
17
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
18 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
useful. This people-first principle is the heart of a class that Lynch teaches
called Engineering for Humanity. The course is based on the innovator’s
compass (Figure 2-1), which was created by Lynch’s colleague Ela Ben-Ur.
The course is interdisciplinary, Lynch said, and students receive half their
credits in anthropology and half in engineering. Students come from three
different colleges—Olin College of Engineering, Wellesley College, and
Babson College—and are placed in teams with an older adult community
partner. These partnerships are facilitated through a longstanding relationship
with the Council on Aging, she said.
The course was first developed with a grant from a local health care
foundation with the aim of creating an opportunity for engineering students
to work with older people to design tools that would help people stay in
FIGURE 2-1 Innovator’s compass.
SOURCES: Lynch presentation, December 8, 2022; Ben-Ur, 2020.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
EXPLORING WHAT MATTERS MOST IN WORKING WITH OLDER 19
their homes and live independently. The first step of the process, Lynch
said, is for students to get to know the older adults and to understand
what matters
to them. Using the iterative innovator’s compass, the students
immerse themselves in the lives of their senior partners and come up with
ideas to help people achieve their goals. For example, students may go to
movies with their partners, go shopping, or play chair volleyball in a senior
center. Lynch offered the example of one student team that went grocery
shopping with an older adult named Terry who uses a wheelchair and
has hearing loss. In the second step of the compass, the students observed
that Terry had issues with reaching and carrying groceries at the store as
well as challenges in her home. In the third step, the students identified
the principles that were important to Terry, namely, independence, social
engagement, and positivity. The students brainstormed multiple potential
ideas, including a tool to help Terry reach groceries, a way for her to use
her oven, and multi-modal alarms in her home. Many plans and prototypes
were produced, and the students ultimately focused on helping Terry get her
groceries from the store. One approach that could have been taken, Lynch
said, would be to stack four bags of groceries on the back of the wheelchair
to maximize convenience and efficiency. However, going to the store was an
important activity for Terry, given her desire for social engagement. Thus,
instead of maximizing efficiency, the students maximized social engagement
by producing a system that would help Terry carry two bags of groceries on
the back of her chair. Students used a “prototype, pilot, produce” iterative
process to develop the final product. The product included communication
symbols and served as a point of conversation at the store, which meant
that Terry was able to do what mattered most to her and spend her time
engaging with those around her.
Lynch shared several other examples of designs that students created
during the course, including a tool to help a man with diabetic neuropathy
massage his own feet instead of waking his wife to massage them, a device
that magnified photos for a woman with macular degeneration who liked to
tell stories about her photos, and a cutting board with physical guides for
a woman with vision problems who loved to cook. Lynch emphasized that
although the class helps students develop their engineering skills, the focus
is on understanding people and what matters to them. “Engineering skills
include people skills,” she said, just as health professionals need training
in listening to people and understanding their experiences. Furthermore,
the type of creativity used in the program is not confined to engineers or
designers. People in any profession can use a system like the innovator’s
compass to observe and figure out what really matters to people and how
to address those needs.
Lynch was joined by two students from the course along with their
community partner, Peggy, to share their story. The project began during
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
20 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
the COVID-19 pandemic, said one of the students, Ian Eykamp, which
meant that initial meetings were held over Zoom. During these sessions,
the team learned about Peggy, her family, and her routine. Eykamp emphasized
that it was important to learn about all aspects of Peggy because
without this knowledge, it would have been difficult to know what would
be useful. One challenge that Peggy told the students about was difficulty
carrying laundry down the stairs. Over Zoom, she described the problem
and shared pictures and video of her staircase and railing. The students and
Peggy brainstormed ideas, which included a laundry chute, a “mini ski lift,”
a tristar wheel stair climbing basket, a pulley system, and a sled attached
to the railings. Eykamp said that Peggy “was full of great suggestions and
solutions” and that it was critical to get her firsthand perspective as the
person who actually experienced the challenge and needed a solution. The
students performed experiments, tried out concepts in sketch models, and
developed prototypes. As COVID vaccines became available, the team was
able to visit Peggy in her home and have her try out some of the potential
solutions. The final product was a device that holds a laundry basket and
slides down the railing. Zoie Leo, another student member of the team,
added that a plastic stopper at the bottom of the railing was central to the
design and said that it was only possible to add this component because
they were working in the specific space that they were designing for.
Peggy Wihtol, the team’s community partner, told workshop participants
about her experience in the Engineering for Humanity class. Wihtol
retired at 62 and enjoyed an active retirement, volunteering at a food
pantry and a nursing home, working part-time, and traveling with her
husband. In 2014 her husband began showing signs of Alzheimer’s, and
she soon became his full-time caregiver. He entered a nursing home in late
2019 and died of COVID-19 in early 2020. The pandemic left Wihtol in
isolation at home, with no caregiving responsibilities or volunteer responsibilities.
Friends called and checked on her, but she mostly stayed home
due to COVID.
She joked that her dog did not learn to speak English, no
matter how much she talked to her. By January 2021, Wihtol said, she was
“desperate” for something to do, and she learned about the opportunity to
participate in the class. She was very happy to have people to talk to and
to learn from, she said, although the class was “unlike any college class”
she had ever taken. One of the first things that happened was that she received
a brown box at the door full of “strange stuff” like paper towel rolls,
pipe cleaners, clay, fabric, and Post-it Notes. The first Zoom class felt like
“speed dating,” with everyone trying to get to know each other. Wihtol said
she appreciated the emphasis on finding ways to stay in her home, because
after 50 years in the same house, moving out would be harder than staying.
Wihtol and the students got to know each other over Zoom; she was
interested in the people on her team, and she found that they had things
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
EXPLORING WHAT MATTERS MOST IN WORKING WITH OLDER 21
in common. The students and Wihtol bonded over their interests in travel,
dogs, the outdoors, cooking, education, and business, and some of the students
had relatives with Alzheimer’s. Wihtol’s main concern that she wanted
addressed was her safety, particularly on the stairs. The team batted around
many ideas, and she nixed some of them based on concerns about safety or
due to the layout of her home. Wihtol said that she came up with the idea
of the stair rail rider and felt “very responsible” for the ultimate design.
The process required a lot of trust, she said, particularly because everyone
was working remotely due to COVID. Each student found his or her own
niche of responsibility and own way to communicate with Wihtol. She said
that she tried to be “gentle” when she communicated with the students,
particularly when she was shooting down one of their ideas. The students
taught Wihtol how to use new technologies, such as Google Slides, and
she taught herself new things as well. She is still in touch with some of the
students and has visited their colleges. Wihtol read the summary she wrote
at the end of the project:
My thanks to Olin, the Engineering for Humanity faculty, the students
on Team Peg. I had been in a rough place with COVID and
the loss of my husband, and needed something new and interesting
to invest in and concentrate on. This was it. The pleasure of working
with young, ambitious, caring students, a faculty and facility
which so strongly believes in hands-on learning and fostering community
relationships, and all of the Engineering for Humanity
program has renewed my soul and re-engaged my brain.
AGE-FRIENDLY HEALTH SYSTEMS AND THE 4MS FRAMEWORK
Mary Dolansky, a professor in the School of Nursing at Case Western
Reserve University, and Ann Pohnert, the lead director of clinical quality
at CVS MinuteClinic, told workshop participants about their experience
implementing the 4Ms age-friendly health systems framework in CVS
MinuteClinics. Age-Friendly Health Systems is an initiative aimed at ensuring
that older adults receive evidence-based care in every setting, from
hospitals to primary care to convenient care settings, Pohnert said. There
are many evidence-based geriatric care models that have been proven effective,
she continued, but only a small proportion of these are reaching those
who could benefit. This is due, she said, to the fact that it can be difficult
to disseminate and scale models and to reproduce performance in settings
with fewer resources, and models may not translate across care settings.
The 4Ms is an evidence-based framework for age-friendly care that was
developed by geriatric experts. These experts identified four essential sets
of evidence-based practices that cause no harm, can be used by anyone, and
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
22 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
are consistent with what matters most to older adults and their families.
The aim of the 4Ms movement was to reach older adults in 2,600 hospitals,
practices, clinics, and nursing homes by June 30, 2023; Pohnert said
the goal had already been exceeded as of December 2022. One partner in
the initiative is CVS MinuteClinics, which are care clinics located in CVS
stores. There are about 1,100 clinics in 36 states; these clinics see about
6 million patients per year, including 1 million older adults. Clinics are
staffed by nurse practitioners and physician assistants and are accredited
by the Joint Commission. The care at MinuteClinics is less expensive than
traditional care, Pohnert said, in part because there are fewer overhead
costs. These clinics serve as a safety net for the community, and there is a
high rate of patient satisfaction.
The four Ms in the 4Ms program refer to what matters, medication,
mentation, and mobility (Figure 2-2). Each setting that implements the
4Ms program may define them slightly differently, depending on the patient
population and their needs, Pohnert said. She described each of the four
Ms in turn. The first M is “what matters.” This means that providers
need to know and understand each individual’s specific health outcome
goals and care preferences and to align care with these needs. In the CVS
MinuteClinic context, this entails having a discussion about what matters
in every visit (except for vaccinations and express visits for COVID), asking
patients what matters, documenting what they say, and acting upon it.
The second M is “medication.” If medications are necessary for a patient,
the 4Ms framework encourages the use of age-friendly medications that do
not interfere with the other Ms (what matters, mentation, and mobility).
At the MinuteClinic, Pohnert said, this means checking medications against
the American Geriatric Society Beers list of medications that may not be
appropriate for older adults and discussing with the patient ways to make
medication use safer, e.g., using pillboxes, education, and deprescribing.
The third M is “mentation,” which has two parts. The first is depression,
which MinuteClinics screen for using the PhQ-2 and PhQ-9. Based on
the results of the screening, the provider may provide a brochure, educate
the patient, or refer the patient to an appropriate outside provider. The
second part of mentation is dementia; MinuteClinics screen for dementia
using the Mini-
Cog© and educate or refer patients to other providers or
resources. Finally, the fourth M is “mobility.” The aim of this piece is to ensure
that each older adult moves safely every day to maintain function and
to do what matters most. MinuteClinics use a Modified Timed Get Up and
Go test to assess mobility, and they may provide patients with a brochure,
further education, or a referral. All screening results and actions taken are
documented in the electronic health record, Pohnert said.
Although each of the four Ms is important in and of itself, Pohnert
said, they are meant to be assessed as a set. Over the last 3 years at CVS
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
EXPLORING WHAT MATTERS MOST IN WORKING WITH OLDER 23
FIGURE 2-2 The four Ms of age-friendly health systems.
SOURCE: Pohnert presentation, December 8, 2022; Institute for Healthcare Improvement,
2023, Age-friendly health systems. https://www.ihi.org/Engage/Initiatives/
Age-
Friendly-Health-Systems/Pages/default.aspx (accessed April 22, 2023). Used with
permission.
MinuteClinics, there have been over 40,000 visits in which all four Ms were
used, and over 370,000 visits in which at least one M was used. Throughout
this time period, the proportion of visits with the use of all four Ms
has increased significantly, and progress has also been seen in increased
visit times for older adults. Pohnert shared a real-life example of how the
process works. A 75-year-old female came into the clinic to be evaluated
and treated for a sinus infection. The nurse practitioner who treated her
looked at her medical history and talked to her about what mattered to
her—in this case, family togetherness and health. She moved around well,
although she expressed concerns about living alone and falling. The nurse
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
24 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
practitioner discussed eliminating clutter and other safety issues around
the home. Two of her medications were flagged as potential concerns, and
she reported that she had already spoken with her primary provider about
them; he indicated she could not reduce or eliminate either medication.
On a memory assessment, the patient had difficulty recalling words and
reported that she was concerned about her short-term memory. The nurse
practitioner added a neurology referral to the record and urged the patient
to talk to her primary provider as well as her family. The patient, Pohnert
said, was very happy with her care and very appreciative for the extra time
and attention. While the visit was for a specific illness, the patient was able
to receive support and care for a number of issues because of the tools and
support given to the clinician.
Implementation and Educational Strategies
After Pohnert described the details of the 4Ms program, Dolansky
discussed implementation of the program. The approach taken to implement
the 4Ms into MinuteClinics has bearing on how to implement
geriatrics
concepts into health professions education and residency, she
said. Dolansky
described a number of methods and frameworks that were
used to expand the reach of the 4Ms, including the learning health care
organization, quality improvement, and implementation science. Learning
health care organizations are those that are willing to learn and improve;
educational organizations must also be willing to learn and improve in
order to implement new ideas and approaches. The quality improvement
efforts,
Dolansky said, were led by the director of clinical quality, who
established
a quality improvement infrastructure. In clinical practice, she
said, a lot of change can be facilitated by the data generated by the electronic
health record; educational organizations also need infrastructure
in order to use quality improvement approaches. The plan–do–study–act
(PDSA) philosophy
can be used in small test cycles to reflect on and make
changes, she said. The implementation science approaches that were used,
Dolansky said, included the Consolidated Framework for Implementation
Science (CFIR), the RE-AIM evaluation framework, and the Expert Recommendations
for Implementing Change (ERIC). Dolansky encouraged
education stakeholders to look to implementation science in order to make
changes in their own systems. Dolansky also shared the logic model used
for implementing the 4Ms into the CVS MinuteClinics (Figure 2-3); she
noted that the tenets of the RE-AIM model (reach, effectiveness, adoption,
implementation, and maintenance) guided the development of the logic
model.
There are three major components of implementation strategies that
are critical for making change, Dolansky said: infrastructure, practice-based
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
25
FIGURE 2-3 Logic model for implementation of age-friendly health systems principles within convenient care settings.
SOURCE: Dolansky presentation, December 8, 2022.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
26 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
tools, and professional development. At MinuteClinics, the infrastructure
that supports implementation of the 4Ms includes data analytics, performance
evaluations, virtual huddles, advisories and newsletters, an electronic
message board, and the clinical dashboard. These mechanisms for support
and feedback are essential for improvement.
A practice-based tool to support implementation of the 4Ms is the EPIC
health record system, which includes a 4M Age-Friendly Evaluation tab
and a pocket card that can be given to patients to help them understand
age-friendly care. Another useful tool for the 4Ms is a patient brochure that
reviews the purpose and history of age-friendly health systems, introduces
the 4Ms, and leaves space for the practitioner to document action steps for
each M. A process map was developed to help practitioners automatically
integrate the 4Ms into their usual primary care visit (Figure 2-4). These
types of tools, Dolansky said, would also be helpful for learners in the
delivery of geriatrics care in different practice settings.
Professional development was also a critical piece of implementing
4Ms into MinuteClinics, Dolansky said. A variety of platforms and activities
were used to reach and educate practitioners, including monthly grant
rounds, optional video vignettes, education exchange on “hot topics,”
acknowledging age-friendly health system champions, clinical education
resources, and a weekly newsletter. One challenge that some of the early
career nurse practitioners have, Dolansky said, is a lack of confidence in
patient communication. In order to address this, a Confident Conversations
tool was created which helps guide providers through the conversations
they need to have about the 4Ms. In addition, providers are given a decision
tree to help guide their actions after assessment (Figure 2-5), and there is
a “virtual clinic” for practitioners to practice and assess their competency
in the 4Ms. Virtual clinical practice is an excellent opportunity to expose
students to geriatric care, she said.
Interprofessional Implications
The 4Ms is a national movement, and it is important that students,
residents, and practitioners all be on board, Dolansky said. In all disciplines,
students should be taught early about the 4Ms and how they will
be expected
to deliver 4Ms care both during and after their education.
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) has created a module for
all health care professionals to learn age-friendly care; this is an excellent
resource to prime students on geriatric care (IHI, 2020). At Case Western
Reserve University, students from multiple health professions programs
can participate in a certificate program for age-friendly learning; the program
includes the IHI module and small group discussions about interprofessional
collaboration on the 4Ms and uses a virtual clinic. Students are
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
27
FIGURE 2-4 Process map for implementation of 4Ms in primary care visit.
SOURCE: Dolansky presentation, December 8, 2022.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
28 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
generally technologically savvy, Dolansky noted, and the virtual environment
offers an opportunity to educate and train students on experiences
they may not get in their practice settings. Embracing these types of educational
opportunities, she said, will allow students to have a robust experience
along the continuum of aging and to embrace the joy of the delivery
of care for older adults.
FIGURE 2-5 Act-on decision tree for mobility.
SOURCE: Dolansky presentation, December 8, 2022.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Key Messages Made by Presenters
• These numbers mean that the population will be more advanced
in age and more racially diverse, with an older workforce, while
Alzheimer’s is projected to increase by 116 percent. (George)
• Ageism itself may deter students from wanting to work in geriatrics
or gerontology. Furthermore, implicit or explicit bias among faculty
in health professions education programs can push students in
other directions. (Hartley)
• The trainees left the clinic each day challenged by the complexity
of the care and also with a high degree of satisfaction because they
felt they were really helping the older adults. (Bradley, Mazzurco,
Lawrence)
• Incentives—particularly financial incentives—are important to the
efforts to increase the workforce and improve senior care. However,
they are often seen as a panacea. (Moone)
Greg Hartley, an associate professor of clinical physical therapy and
medical education at the University of Miami, moderated this session of the
workshop, which focused on whether the supply (i.e., the health care workforce)
is or will be adequate to meet the demand (i.e., the need for care of
older adults). This session was divided into three parts, Hartley explained,
beginning with a presentation detailing how the population of the United
States is changing, what the health care needs of U.S. citizens will be, and
who will be needed to provide care and in what settings. The second part
3
Supply and Demand:
Is the Workforce Prepared to
Meet the Needs of Older Adults?
29
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
30 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
emphasized ageism within push and pull factors that draw people toward
or away from working with older adults. Finally, Hartley said, part three of
the session would gather input from individuals representing a variety
of professional backgrounds to reflect and build upon what they heard in
the previous presentations.
HEALTH CARE NEEDS AND CAREGIVER SUPPLY
Over the next roughly 40 years, said Rebecca George, an M.D. candidate
at the University of California Davis, the U.S. population is expected
to grow by 22 percent to 404 million (Vespa et al., 2020). There will be
a 92 percent increase in the population of adults who are 65 and older
and a nearly 618 percent increase in the number of centenarians (Vespa
et al., 2020). The population will be increasingly diverse, with the majority
of the population being people from ethnic and racial minorities. In
addition
to these general population demographic changes, the makeup of
the labor force is also changing, George said. The proportion of younger
workers will decrease, while the proportion of older workers will increase.
Taken together, she said, these numbers mean that the population will be
more advanced in age and more racially diverse, with an older workforce.
This presents an opportunity, she added, for more cultural humility1 and
understanding of the various intersections of identity of the patients when
engaging with them. As a result of the aging population, the prevalence
of conditions such as diabetes, stroke, heart failure, and hypertension will
increase by around 33 percent, while Alzheimer’s is projected to increase
by 126 percent (Alzheimer’s Association, 2023; Roth, 2022). Currently, the
population of older adults who are providing formal and informal health
care are overwhelmingly female (61 percent), mostly over 75 years old
(74 percent), and around a quarter live alone (AARP, 2020). Care recipients
primarily need care for long-term physical conditions, memory, short-term
physical ailments, and mental health.
Those who care for older adults can be lay people or health care professionals.
A 2020 study by AARP and the National Alliance for Caregiving
found that almost 19 percent of adults are lay caregivers, George said,
and this number is likely to increase as the population ages. Further noted
in the report is that lay caregivers are primarily female and over 50 years
old; 89 percent of caregivers are a relative of those they care for. About a
quarter
of caregivers are caring for multiple adults, and 14 percent have
been caregiving for more than 10 years. COVID-19, with its impacts on
1 Cultural humility is a term used to describe personal relationships that honor another
person’s beliefs, customs, and values; and requires continuous self-exploration and self-critique
while learning from others (Stubbe, 2020).
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 31
mental and physical health, has changed the care landscape in ways that
are still being accounted for, she added.
The health care workforce is projected to grow by 13 percent over
the next 10 years, adding roughly 2 million jobs (BLS, 2022). This growth
will vary greatly by discipline, George said. Disciplines that are projected
to grow by at least 25 percent include nurse practitioners, physician assistants,
home health aides, and occupational therapy assistants and aides. At
the other end, the number of dentists, registered nurses, psychologists, and
physicians is expected to grow by 6 percent or less. George emphasized that
these data reflect the growth in the field and do not speak to whether this
growth is adequate to meet the demand for care. The location of health care
delivery is shifting as well, she said, with direct care worker projected job
openings in home care expected to increase by 37 percent between 2020
and 2023 and by 22 percent in residential care homes during the same
period (PHI, 2023).
The health care professions’ educational system is where these future
professionals will be trained. At present, George said, the United States
has almost 20,000 health care training programs at nearly 9,000 sites (not
specific to geriatrics). More than 50 percent of these programs are graduatelevel
training programs, of which more than half are physician residencies.
This number is at odds with the fact that physicians are one of the slowest
growing groups of health care professionals, she noted. According to
George, last year nearly 80,000 health care professionals pursued faculty
development training; an adequate number of faculty is essential for training
the next generation of health care workers. She further stated that
almost 1.5 million health care professionals pursued continuing education;
however, out of the nearly 9,000 continuing education courses that were
offered, only 5 percent were specific to geriatric health care.
BARRIERS TO CARING FOR OLDER ADULTS
There are a number of barriers to increasing the supply of workers to
care for the growing number of older adults, Hartley said. The pandemic
had a dramatic impact on the workforce by exacerbating existing shortages.
Pandemic-related employment losses in settings including hospitals and
physicians’ offices have largely recovered, while the losses in nursing care
facilities and community care facilities have persisted (Figure 3-1).
Financial barriers can prevent individuals from pursuing jobs that involve
caretaking of older adults, Hartley said. For example, the income of
geriatricians in medicine is at or near the bottom of 30 medical specialties.
For some, the cost of education may not be worth the earning potential.
This disparity reflects systemic ageism, he said; society pays for what it
values.
Ageism is pervasive, particularly in Western cultures, and begins
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
32 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
FIGURE 3-1 Pandemic-related employment losses in health care (cumulative percentage
change in health sector employment by setting).
SOURCES: Hartley presentation, December 8, 2022; Wager, 2023, used with
permission.
with “indoctrination” in early childhood that “aging is a bad thing.” Messages
embedded in nursery rhymes and fairy tales form attitudes and beliefs
that infiltrate everything, including health care. Ageism affects health in
two ways. First, it affects an individual’s health outcomes and longevity;
having a positive attitude about aging can extend life expectancy by as
much as 7.5 years. Second, ageism among health care professionals can
result in suboptimal care in a number of areas. For example, a patient’s
pain may be attributed to age alone, which can lead to a patient receiving
inadequate treatment. A physical therapist may believe an older adult
cannot lift heavier weights or perform more repetitions, resulting in slower
improvement and worse outcomes. Professionals may hold implicit beliefs
about the value and potential of older adults and make decisions such as
placing an older adult in long-term care (instead of an alternative noninstitutional
setting). Clinical researchers have historically excluded older
adults entirely from research studies (in particular, drug studies), though
this has changed recently, he said. The World Health Organization has recognized
ageism as a problem and created a campaign in 2021 to combat
ageism and mitigate its harmful impacts. The Campaign to Combat Ageism
includes social media
posts, information in multiple languages, and powerful
images (WHO, 2021).
Finally, there are barriers within health professions education that prevent
students from pursuing careers in geriatrics. Most programs do not
require a dedicated course in geriatrics, even though almost every health
professional will work with this group at some point in their career. In
contrast, he said, pediatrics is usually a required course despite the fact that
only a fraction of providers will practice in this area. Around 42 percent
of physical therapy programs offer a dedicated course in geriatrics. About
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 33
76 percent of medical schools provide an optional clinical experience in
geriatrics, and 45 percent of programs require a geriatric rotation for all
students (Dawson et al., 2022). Hartley posited that this inadequate attention
to older adults stems in part from a belief that older adults are “just
adults with more years of experience,” instead of understanding that childhood,
adulthood, and elderhood are three distinct phases of life (Aronson,
2019). He quoted a physician who said that most physicians graduate medical
school lacking confidence in how to manage pain in a 90-year-old and
that family practice doctors often know more about rare pediatric genetic
diseases than they do about clearing an elderly patient for surgery.
Having grown up in a society full of messages that devalue older adults,
students may be deterred from wanting to work in geriatrics or gerontology,
Hartley said. Furthermore, implicit or explicit bias among faculty in health
professions education programs can push students in other directions. For
example, faculty may say or imply that caring for older adults is “boring,”
“depressing,” or that “patients don’t improve.” Despite the growing population
of older adults, the number of health care professionals focusing on
geriatrics is actually declining, he said; for example, the number of first-year
residents and fellows studying geriatrics declined by 14 percent between
2012 and 2017 (AAMC, 2018).
ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION
With the presentations of George and Hartley in mind, the session
turned to a roundtable discussion to explore the challenges of building an
adequate workforce for older adults and to discuss potential solutions to
these challenges. Hartley began by asking panelists what has inspired them,
as well as the learners they work with, to pursue a career in working with
older adults. Ryan Bradley, the director of research at the Helfgott Research
Institute at the National University of Natural Medicine, responded that
situational learning is vital to the clinical education experience. As a clinical
educator of medical students and residents, he has observed that situational
learning in primary care delivery to older adults has had a strong and
positive impact on learners’ interest in working with older adults in their
careers. Bradley served as an attending physician in an integrative primary
care clinic nested within a community-based senior center. His previous
employer, Bastyr University, was invited to develop a clinic in this setting
because the senior center leaders recognized that their community members
had unmet needs, including highly uncoordinated care and a lack of guidance
on nutrition, physical activity, and other approaches for improving
function. Fourth-year medical students and residents at the clinic found
their care delivery experience to be highly rewarding, Bradley said. The
patients were appreciative of having care providers listen to their stories,
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
34 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
coordinate their care, and give practical suggestions for improving their
health. The trainees left the clinic each day challenged by the complexity of
the care and also with a high degree of satisfaction because they felt they
were really helping the older adults, he said.
He gave two examples of students whose experiences in the clinic influenced
the direction of their careers. One student, after witnessing the need
for dementia care, went on to operate a clinic that specializes exclusively
in cognition care and also started a residential long-term care facility that
incorporates many of the tenets of integrative medicine, including plantbased
nutrition, combined cognitive and physical exercise, social support,
and highly multidisciplinary care teams on site. Another student entered the
clinic wanting to focus on traditional complementary medicine approaches
(e.g., homeopathy, hydrotherapy). However, her experience in the senior care
community clinic working with patients who had multiple chronic conditions
and were taking multiple medicines, often without a provider managing their
care, shifted her focus, and she now runs an integrative primary care clinic
that focuses almost exclusively on older adults with multiple chronic conditions.
Situational learning experiences like these are pivotal, Bradley said,
both for students to learn about the considerable need that exists in this
population and also to experience how rewarding it can be to work with
“such an appreciative, responsive, and deserving group of people.”
Lauren Mazzurco, a professor of geriatrics at Eastern Virginia Medical
School, said she has had opportunities to work with learners across the continuum,
from premed students to residents, fellows, and practitioners, and
has used these opportunities to find out why they are interested in working
with older adults. Many have had close relationships with older adults in
their own lives and saw the frustrations and challenges that these adults
had with their health care experiences. Learners are also motivated by the
fact that geriatrics has one of the highest satisfaction rates of any medical
specialty as well as by the focus on well-being, self-care, and quality of life.
In geriatrics, she said, it is essential to not “miss the forest for the trees”;
providers must look at every element of a patient’s care and consider ways
to improve function and independence. While taking care of an older adult
can be “very overwhelming,” Mazzurco said, job satisfaction and the ability
to make a big impact can be surprising and empowering for learners.
They take these lessons back to other specialties when on rotation, she said;
for example, a surgery patient may have delirium, and the learner is better
able to understand that individual’s mental state and be more patient. The
career paths for learners who wish to specialize in caring for older adults
are currently quite limited, Mazzurco said, so she advocates for opening up
more diverse specialty track pathways. However, regardless of what field
learners pursue, their experiences with older adults can affect their future
work and help to make health systems more age-friendly.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 35
Working with older adults can be intimidating for new learners in health
care, said Jeannine Lawrence, the senior associate dean in the Department
of
Human Nutrition at University of Alabama, particularly if the learner has
not had any meaningful opportunities in his or her own life to interact with
older adults in a positive manner. Learners often come into the profession
with preconceived stereotypes about older adults; one of the challenges for
educators is to break these stereotypes and show the diversity of the older
adult population. Educators also need to enhance learners’ intentions
to and
enthusiasm for working with older adults and increase their confidence
and skills in doing so. In nutrition—and other health fields—one significant
predictor of intentions to work with older adults is attitudes toward older
adults. Providing frequent and quality interactions with older adults in a
variety of settings is very effective at positively affecting learner attitudes
towards working with older adults, Lawrence said. She explained that this
means that students need more than a single rotation in a long-term care
facility; they also need other opportunities to engage with older adults, such
as through partnerships with community agencies or working with seniors
who live independently. Subjective norms provide another strong predictor
of intentions to work with older adults. When faculty and other role models
themselves work with and talk about older adults, it can create a perception
that this is a valuable career path and inspire learners to follow such a
path. Finally, Lawrence said, learners need interprofessional education and
training to prepare themselves for geriatric practice; it can be a real deterrent
to students who think they will be solely responsible for making decisions
about the complex care of older adults.
Lawrence told workshop participants about a program she and her
colleagues developed to address confidence and roles in a health care team.
Nutrition, nursing, social work, and medical students sat together and discussed
their scope of practice and perceived roles within the team; Lawrence
said it was “pretty fun” because none of the students had any idea what
training or skills the other students had. The teams then went out and
worked with rural older adults over a period of 6 months to assess and address
their health care and daily living needs. During this time, the students
experienced a rapid upturn in confidence in both working and connecting
with the older adult participants, as well as building reliance and trust in
their own team. The students no longer felt unprepared to meet the needs
of the 38 participants because they knew exactly who on the team to turn
to when a need was identified. After this experience, the students reported
feeling more confident working with older adults and with other health care
professionals. Encouraging and inspiring learners to work with older adults
requires a multi-pronged approach, Lawrence said, including providing
high-quality interactions with older adults, varied and regular experiences,
good role models, and interprofessional training.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
36 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Financial Barriers
Hartley next turned to financial barriers. He asked Rajean Moone,
the faculty director for long-term care administration in the College of
Continuing
and Professional Studies at the University of Minnesota, to
comment on incentive structures for encouraging health care students and
professionals to work with older adults. “We don’t have long lines of
students entering gerontological and geriatric practice,” Moone said, so
incentives—particularly financial incentives—are important to the efforts
to increase the workforce and improve senior care. However, he continued,
they are often seen as a panacea that will magically solve all of the
problems. In practice, the success of financial incentives is contingent upon
other systemic factors and reform. Incentives are fairly straightforward
and are not a new phenomenon; the basic principle is that humans are
driven toward
rewards and away from negative experiences. Incentives
in the senior
care workforce tend to be a patchwork of state and federal
programs, and they are often under-resourced.
Financial incentives can fall into several categories. The first are incentives
for students currently in school. These could include scholarship
programs and paid internships working with older adults. The second
is incentives for those who have already graduated. Loan forgiveness is
paramount in this area, and many states have piloted and implemented
loan-forgiveness
programs for those who work in senior care, particularly
in rural and other underserved areas. The third type of incentive is for
those already working in senior care, such as increased wages or competitive
benefits. Moone warned, however, that wages and benefits are part of
a much larger and more complicated conversation about long-term care
financing reform. The nursing home sector has suffered for decades from
underinvestment and a lack of accountability in how resources are allocated.
In Minnesota, he said, the average hourly wage for a direct-care staff
member in senior care is around $16 per hour; in comparison, the starting
hourly wage at a major retailer is $20 per hour with full benefits and tuition
assistance. There were a few incentives that were implemented during
COVID—
primarily relaxing barriers to certifications and credentials—that
are being phased out. These have provided a temporary boost to the senior
care workforce, but the impact on the quality of care is unclear.
Unfortunately, there is not a great deal of longitudinal literature of the
effectiveness of financial incentives aimed at students, recent graduates, or
workers. It is clear that incentives can provide a temporary boost, but their
long-term sustainability is not clear. Moone said that there are larger-scale,
systemic changes that have the potential for increasing the workforce, such
as immigration reform or increasing reimbursement rates, but these are
not often considered in conversations about workforce incentives. There
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 37
is a need to explore long-term, proven strategies to ensure a vital, robust
workforce, including financial incentives and other approaches.
Incentivizing Nurses
Hartley asked Barbara Resnick, a professor in the Department of
Organizational
Systems and Adult Health at the University of Maryland
School of Nursing, for her perspective on non-financial incentives that
could encourage people to choose careers working with older adults.
Resnick
responded
that the conversation about a looming boom of older
adults and the lack of an adequate health care workforce often “dances
around what needs to be done.” She put it bluntly: “Change the law, and
you change behavior.” All people working in health care are going to be
dealing with older adults in some way, she said, and they should be required
to learn about this population. In nursing, every adult nurse practitioner
is required to be trained in geriatric care. This needs to be done across all
health disciplines, Resnick said; this is the “number one way to change
things.” Once exposed to working with older adults, there will be some
learners who realize how much they enjoy the field. For others, they will
simply be trained in how to better care for older adults across all settings.
After all, she commented, even in pediatrics one has to care for and address
the grandparents. A second way, as many other speakers have noted, is to
expose students to older adults. However, educators have the responsibility
to make these experiences fun and opportunities for learning critically
important assessment, diagnosis, and management skills, rather than presenting
long-term care as a “negative, horrible clinical experience.” The
third approach for encouraging students to work with older adults is to
focus on job opportunities and job security. Resnick said that she tells her
students that the best positions are in long-term care because they will see
diseases and have experiences they would not have otherwise, they will have
a team to work with, and they will be able to change how care is provided.
Resnick agreed with Moone that incentives are often a short-term fix and
that structural changes are needed to truly improve the system.
Specialization Issues
In medicine, geriatrics is usually a sub-specialty of internal medicine
or family medicine, Hartley said. Other professions have also created specialties
or sub-specialties for working with older adults, but it can be a
struggle to get people to choose these specialties. Hartley asked panelists
to comment on this challenge. Mazzurco said that this is a big problem
and that there need to be creative solutions. She noted that while there
is “big G geriatrics”
(highly trained board-certified geriatricians of which
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
38 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
the numbers are dwindling), there is also “little g geriatrics” (geriatric
scholars who teach geriatrics principles to all health professions and to
the public), and both are important (Callahan et al., 2017). The American
Geriatric Society
has made some innovative efforts in this area, such as integrated
residencies
and fellowships; this allows learners to gain experience
in geriatrics
from the very beginning of residency rather than waiting until
the end to do specialty training. Some providers who are already practicing
and have realized the gap in their own knowledge and skill set in caring
for older adults may wish to pursue a geriatrics fellowship, Mazzurco said,
but it is just not logistically possible for many people. There are innovative
models evolving that offer fellowships that fit within providers’ lives, such
as “interrupted fellowships” that allow providers to work in between rotations
for the fellowship. Until geriatrics training is required for all health
professions learners, these types of programs can bridge the gap and provide
creative solutions for training people in geriatrics.
George added that in addition to the challenge of getting learners to
specialize in geriatric care, primary care as a specialty is undervalued in
medicine. This will have a big impact on the older adult population moving
forward, she said. Learners come out of medical education with hundreds
of thousands of dollars of debt, and they are not incentivized to enter a field
that will make it challenging to pay off their debt.
Role of Families and Lay Caregivers
Given the likely inadequate workforce and the growing older adult
population, Hartley said, much of the care of older adults will be provided
by lay people and untrained individuals. Hartley asked panelists for
thoughts on how these caregivers could potentially be trained or integrated
into the health system. Resnick responded that there is a big initiative in
nursing to conduct family trainings; she said that “the expectations now on
families are mind boggling.” Nurses often are the ones who most closely
interact with families, particularly during transitions of care. Nurses need
training in cultural competence, communication, and other skills to help
them reach these families. Resnick said there are opportunities to bring
families into acute or subacute care environments to allow them to begin to
practice the skills they will need at home, noting that as a mother of triplets
in the neonatal intensive care unit, she insisted on providing as much
care as she could to her babies. Another way to train lay people, she said,
is with apprenticeship programs, which were historically very common in
medicine and nursing.
Bradley said that while family members can play a very important role,
“we need to be really careful to not redirect the responsibility of health
care back to family members.” The responsibility of primary care is to help
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 39
patients navigate their care and develop coordinated care plans, and this
should not be placed on the shoulders of family members. There are other
professionals who could be used, such as health coaches, who could contribute
to senior care if they were empowered to serve in this role. Family
members are important for patient care, but the health care delivery system
and community still holds primary responsibility in this regard. Maryam
Tabrizi, a geriatric dentist at the University of Nevada Las Vegas agreed
with Bradley, saying that care providers open the “door to neglect” when
they pass the responsibility for care to family members. Caring for older
adults is exhausting and can last years, she said, and the emotions involved
can make it even more challenging.
Role of State Policy
Shirley Girouard, who is part of the nursing faculty at the State University
of New York Downstate, asked about state policies that could be
helpful in expanding and strengthening the workforce for older adult care.
Moone replied that many incentives, particularly financial incentives, are
the product of state legislation, and states can also choose to relax requirements
for certification and credentials. In addition, states have key roles
in broader workforce development. In Minnesota, for example, there is
currently a huge number of open positions in senior care, and many senior
care communities have to deny admission because they do not have enough
workers to care for people. With record unemployment rates and competition
from other employers, it is time to have a complex conversation
about changing the way that long-term care is financed. In particular, he
explained, a key issue is paying for the real value of nurses. Any conversation
about this will require confronting difficult topics such as sexism
and racism and the value that society places on different members of our
communities.
Hartley pointed out the need for macro, meso, and micro levels of
change. At the micro level, there is a need to advocate for changes in
accreditation
standards and require geriatrics for all learners. At the meso
level, there is a need to advocate for state legislators to do their part to
bolster the workforce. At the macro level, federal action on the financing of
long-term care or long-term support services is needed, along with discussions
about Medicare and Medicaid payments.
Defining Quality
Bradley noted that several speakers during the workshop had brought
up the issue of not sacrificing quality when considering innovations in
training and care delivery. Quality is of course essential, he said, but he
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
40 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
urged stakeholders to consider what quality means to the older adults
themselves. Within the health professions, quality is sometimes defined
by process metrics or processes, but patients are looking for things that
improve their quality of life, function, and health. He emphasized the need
to think outside the box about what really matters to the individual and to
keep the focus on that.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Key Messages Made by Presenters
• Opportunities for students are not available at all institutions, and
students are not always inclined to voluntarily learn about older
adults. (Brickman)
• The Dementia Friends program resulted in statistically improved
attitudes among students about persons with dementia. (McCarthy)
• Age-friendly universities use a framework of ten principles that
relate to the active engagement of older adults in campus life.
(Moone)
• The Virtual Interprofessional Consultation Clinic sessions consist
of an introduction to the process, multiple 5- to 8-minute patient
assessments, and questions, followed by an interprofessional discussion
and development of the clinical assessment note by the
students/trainees without the patient present. (Hicks-Roof)
With a rapidly growing population of older adults, there is a pressing
demand to expand and strengthen the workforce of health professionals
caring for older adults. However, there are a number of challenges in doing
so, including ageism, lack of opportunities to engage with older adults, and
a lack of interest among many health professionals in working with older
adult populations. In this workshop session, speakers presented details
about innovative programs and initiatives that are addressing these challenges
and building a strong health care workforce for older adults.
4
Addressing the Gap
41
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
42 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
CHANGING ATTITUDES ABOUT
WORKING WITH OLDER ADULTS
Lily Brickman, a recent graduate of the master’s program in food science
and human nutrition at the University of Maine, spoke to workshop
participants about her experience as a dietetic student working with older
adults. Brickman said she had always wanted to be a dietitian and that after
working in a nursing home she began to realize the importance of proper
nutrition for older adults. In graduate school, she was given the opportunity
to work as a graduate assistant under the Geriatric Workforce Enhancement
Program. Part of her responsibilities was helping out with a course at
the University of Maine on nutritional care for older adults. Brickman said
that only four or five students enrolled in the course each semester that she
worked on the course and that in the past semester no students were registered.
After talking with her thesis advisor, Brickman decided to focus her
masters’ thesis research on educating dietetic students about the nutritional
concerns of older adults. The goals of her research were to examine the interest
of dietetics students in working with older adults and to understand
different academic programs’ needs for teaching dietetics students in this
area. Brickman conducted two surveys, one of the food science and human
nutrition students at University of Maine and another of the Nutrition and
Dietetic Educators and Preceptors (NDEP) group, an organizational unit
of the Academy of Nutrition Dietetics. NDEP consists of a wide variety of
professionals, Brickman said, including educators, faculty, internship directors,
internship preceptors, and program coordinators. The response rate to
her surveys was low, she said, but there were still valuable insights gained.
Given the expected growth in the older adult population, the availability
of opportunities for dietetics students to learn about older adults must
be increased, Brickman said. Opportunities for students are not available
at all institutions, and students are not always inclined to voluntarily learn
about older adults. If offering full courses is not feasible, relevant content
should be added into existing courses. It is also critical, she said, to educate
credentialed dietitians and other nutrition professionals about nutrition in
older adults and provide incentives such as continuing education credits.
Registered dietitians need 15 continuing education credits each year; this
is a great opportunity to reach these professionals, she said. Brickman
expressed her hope that her research provides insight into student interest
in learning and working with older adults as well as insight into the availability
of older adult nutrition education at institutions across the United
States. She emphasized that further research is needed regarding effective
strategies for increasing student interest in working with older adults.
Jeannine Lawrence from the University of Alabama asked Brickman to
reflect on her learning opportunities in the area of nutrition and older adults
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 43
and on what worked best for her as a learner. Brickman responded that
in her nutrition/geriatrics classes, what was most beneficial were hands-on
activities
that allowed students to interview and speak with older adults
about their health, their lifestyle, and what changes needed to be made.
In the literature she reviewed for her thesis, Brickman said, research indicated
that these types of hands-on experiences can improve health professions
students’ interest in and attitude toward working with older adults;
these experiences could include performing exams, using a simulation, or
working with older adults on their mobility challenges. Such activities,
Brickman said, are effective ways for students to gain an understanding of
the challenges that older adults face and to change learner attitudes about
working with this population. George, also a student, agreed that direct
experience—
with any population—is what often leads to interest in working
in a particular area. Hazen said that as a nursing doctoral student, she
had observed that Brickman herself became interested in working with
older adults based on her personal experiences working in nursing homes.
George said that older adults are often not particularly visible in our society,
so opportunities to interact with older adults need to be made more readily
available. Intergenerational relationships can be rich and meaningful, and
not having the opportunity to build these relationships is a “huge loss” for
everyone, George said. In addition, content about healthy aging needs to
be integrated early and often into health professions education programs.
George said that she is in her last year of medical school and has yet to take
a course on healthy aging. She is currently developing a course herself; she
said that it is essential for people who are passionate in this area to take
actions that force changes. The course she is developing will be required,
which she said is important because people often do not know what they
are interested in until they learn more about it. Annette Greer, a researcher
in interprofessional education at East Carolina University, noted that health
professions curricula are often driven by what is on the licensing exam. If
there are few or no questions about aging on an exam, the topic is unlikely
to be covered in a curriculum. There is a need for national boards to value
this population and to acknowledge that older adults are a population for
which caregivers need specific education and training.
Katie Eliot of the Department of Nutritional Sciences at The University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center asked Brickman and George to
comment on the role of faculty and how they can serve as role models for
students making decisions about career paths. Brickman responded that
the faculty members at her school often share stories about their work—
whether in community nutrition, clinical nutrition, or other areas—and
about the impact their work has had on patients or community members.
These stories, she said, are inspirational and have made her more certain
about her career. George added that her focus is on palliative care and that
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
44 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
many of her early mentors were palliative care physicians who emphasized
the humanity of patients and the importance of relationship. Once
she began medical school, she said, she found that the focus was often on
pathology
rather than personhood. However, George said that she felt lucky
to have found some faculty mentors centered on the human being rather
than the disease. This is a major issue both in health professions education
and in practice, she said, particularly among older adults who can feel that
providers are focusing on their diseases rather than on them as individual
people. Just as learners need exposure to older adults to know if they want
to work in that area, George said, learners also need mentors to show them
what is possible and to open their eyes to new perspectives.
ATTITUDES ABOUT MEMORY LOSS
Teresa McCarthy, a geriatrician and associate professor of medicine in
the Department of Family Medicine at the University of Minnesota, and
Teresa Schicker, a program manager of the Minnesota Northstar Geriatric
Workforce Enhancement Program at the University of Minnesota, told
workshop participants about a simple, effective intervention to increase
awareness of dementia, and they explored how activities such as this could
impact the future workforce. McCarthy said that as a clinical educator, she
has been teaching geriatrics for many years to students from many health
professions. Because more students have been required to participate in
geriatrics rotations in recent years, she learned that many trainees have had
absolutely no exposure to older people or dementia. She also uncovered a lot
of misperceptions and ageism in the trainee group as well as a lack of empathy.
McCarthy said she looked for a module or activity she could use to address
this problem, and she came across the Dementia Friends program. This
is a worldwide movement to develop age-friendly and dementia-friendly
communities. The core component of the program, she said, is information
sessions that use a “train the trainer” model; people who attend sessions can
take a brief training and then take the content into their own communities.
It is explicitly not an education session, McCarthy emphasized, but rather
an information session by community members to community members.
It consists of 60 minutes of scripted content that is proprietary but free to
access.
Sessions can be held in person or virtually, with up to 70 participants.
The session focuses on five key messages about dementia:
• Dementia is not a normal part of aging;
• Dementia is caused by diseases of the brain;
• Dementia is not just about having memory problems;
• It is possible to have good quality of life with dementia;
• There is more to a person than his or her dementia.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 45
Content is delivered in an “upbeat” and “comfortable” way, she said,
with some individual activities to reflect on one’s perspectives on aging and
dementia. Small group interactions and story telling allow the trainers to
augment the content with their own life experiences, which really enhances
the experience for learners. At the end, there are practical recommendations
for effective communication with people with Alzheimer’s disease. McCarthy
said that residents find the content interesting and helpful.
McCarthy showed an image that is used in the Dementia Friends
training (Figure 4-1). The image is of two bookcases, one representing the
healthy brain and one representing the brain of a person with progressing
dementia. The bookshelf of the dementia patient has been “shaken,” which
results in many of the books on the top falling off; these are analogous to
facts and complex thinking. However, most of the books on the bottom stay
FIGURE 4-1 Bookcase analogy from Dementia Friends.
SOURCE: McCarthy presentation, December 8, 2022.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
46 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
in place when shaken; these books are analogous to emotions, love, and
sense of self. This is a great visual for understanding dementia, McCarthy
said, and it provides context for how to interact with dementia patients.
McCarthy said that she used the Dementia Friends program with her
students and wanted to evaluate what impact it was having on their attitudes
and knowledge. She and her colleagues and students developed a study that
surveyed around 100 students (medical, physical therapy, and pharmacy)
before and after the program. The study used a validated 20-question scale
called the Dementia Attitudes Scale (O’Connor and McFadden, 2010),
which incorporates both knowledge about these diseases as well as a person’s
comfort in interacting with dementia patients. The study found that
the program resulted in statistically improved attitudes. The takeaway message,
McCarthy said, is that a modest effort information session, delivered
by students and lay people, increased knowledge and improved attitudes of
health professional students towards those living with dementia.
Schicker provided details about how the Dementia Friends program was
implemented at the University of Minnesota. She said that the program can
be implemented in a variety of settings, including academic institutions, clinical
settings, and community settings. Because of the train-the-trainer model,
there have been several students who have “taken it and run with it,” she
said. For example, a pharmacy student expanded it to the school of pharmacy,
and several of that student’s colleagues have become trainers in turn.
This is an excellent opportunity, Shicker said, for leadership development
among health professions students. Thus far at the University of Minnesota,
the program has trained 164 health professionals and community members
and 825 health science students, with students coming from areas including
nursing, physical therapy, mortuary science, education and human development,
and public health. Next year, the program will be offered at primary
care clinics around the state. Schicker stressed that Dementia Friends can be
offered in informal settings such as student clubs, libraries, or classrooms
and that it can be done online or in person. The program is proprietary, so
it must be licensed through the U.S. or U.K. branch of Dementia Friends.
Schicker urged stakeholders to hold sessions for interprofessional groups,
although she noted that offering classes made up of a single profession is
also an option.
The Dementia Friends program is a “pleasant experience for everybody
involved,” Shicker said, and it is effective and building knowledge
and empathy. Health professions students or practitioners can also recommend
the program to their own patients or to caregivers of their patients.
McCarthy commented on how Dementia Friends received some pushback
early on from health professions faculty because the program presents very
basic information and does not “dig deep” into pathology. However, the
reason that the program resonates is its “gut impact,” which augments
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 47
the underlying content, as well as the way it provides an understanding of
what it is like to live with dementia.
AGE-FRIENDLY UNIVERSITIES
There are a variety of age-friendly initiatives in a number of sectors,
Rajean Moone said. For example, the World Health Organization
and AARP have a framework for age-friendly communities, which allows
people to assess a community and look for opportunities for a community
to become more age-friendly. There are also efforts in the area of health
systems, public health, businesses, creativity and the arts, and universities.
All of these efforts come together under the umbrella of an age-friendly
ecosystem; Moone said that institutions following age-friendly principles
are making a commitment to the future and to moving the needle toward
a more inclusive, supportive environment for an aging population. He
also shared details about age-friendly universities and the principles that
guide them. Age-friendly universities use a framework of 10 principles in
areas that include online educational opportunities, a range of educational
needs, health and wellness, research agenda, and second careers. All of
these principles, he said, relate to the active engagement of older adults in
campus life. One of the 10 principles, intergenerational learning, is aimed
at facilitating the reciprocal sharing of expertise among learners of all ages.
Intergenerational learning has a number of benefits, including exposing
younger students to older adults and affecting their attitudes and beliefs
about age and potential career paths.
To begin the process of helping the University of Minnesota (UMN) become
an age-friendly university, a task force was created that was made up
of individuals representing programs incentivized to work with older adults
across campus. The task force started by sharing information. Moone explained
that UMN is an enormous campus, so people are often siloed in
their own areas. The task force enabled collaborative work across siloes.
The task force conducted an assessment that looked at all departments and
services, including arts, sports, enrollment, and employment. UMN used a
tool created by the University of Massachusetts to inventory all programs
and services and identify opportunities to build capacity. After the results of
the assessment were presented to university leadership, the university president
formed the Age-Friendly University of Minnesota Council and enrolled
UMN in the global network.1 Enrollment in the network was the “easiest
part” of the process, Moone said; the hardest part was finding the resources
1 The Age-Friendly University (AFU) global network is made up of institutions of higher
education from around the world that have endorsed and acted upon the 10 AFU principles
(Gerontological Society of America, 2023).
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
48 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
and time required to fully examine the university’s age-friendliness and
making a commitment to change.
The UMN council is made up of a number of entities across campus,
including the Alumni Association, the Women’s Club, the Office of Public
Engagement, the Center for Healthy Aging and Innovation, the Osher
Lifelong Learning Institution, the MN Northstar Geriatrics Workforce
Enhancement
Program, and the Retirees’ Association. Critical to the success
of the program were community partnerships, Moone said. He is an appointed
member of the Governor’s Council for an Age-Friendly Minnesota,
which allows him to bring the university lens to the broader conversation
about age-friendliness in the state. Community partnerships with UMN
include partnerships with the state unit on aging health systems, area agencies
on aging, home- and community-based service providers, AARP, senior
housing, and the media. Moone said that one of the first major activities
of the UMN Age-Friendly Council was establishing Age-Friendly University
Day, which was dedicated to bringing life-long learners, retirees, and
older Minnesotans to campus to converse about various topics relevant to
their lives and to get them accustomed to coming to campus. There was a
fireside chat with a former Minnesota Supreme Court justice and another
with a former Minnesota Vikings player; these events excited and attracted
older adults, Moone said. Media are a critical partner in these efforts, he
said, for telling the story and getting the word out about the activities and
initiatives at the university.
Moone asked breakout room participants to share questions or comments
about their own experiences. Eliot commented that as a registered
dietitian, she thinks about the way food systems and nutrition interact with
the aging population. She asked Moone if the age-friendly initiatives at
UMN involve this area. He responded that the Center for Nutrition Studies
at UMN has largely been focused on nutrition in early life. However, the
center has also been exploring the issue of food insecurity and older adults.
UMN, in conjunction with the state, has been looking at rates of participation
in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and has found that
the rate of uptake in seniors is quite low compared with other populations.
In response to this finding, the center has done targeted outreach to these
communities. Moone said that his own lens on nutrition is quite different;
he focuses on long-term care administrators and looks at innovations in
nutrition (e.g., research on making food more appealing).
A workshop participant, Delfina Alvarez, asked Moone to comment on
whether there is any collaboration or coordination between the age-friendly
university network and the age-friendly community network. He responded
by sharing one example of such collaboration. At the Age-Friendly University
Day, AARP put on a presentation about age-friendly communities and
gave people information about how they can get involved in these efforts.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 49
Another way in which these two entities collaborate is by having a representative
from the university help out when a community is undergoing the
process of becoming age-friendly. For example, it can be helpful to have
an academic voice present evidence to policy makers in discussions about
allocating resources to age-friendly community initiatives.
Patrick DeLeon, a psychologist professor with the Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, asked Moone how to institutionalize
age-friendliness into universities rather than relying on the passion and
dedication of individual faculty members. DeLeon noted that good ideas
can easily come and go, depending on what the next generation of leaders
wants to do. Moone responded that this is always a major consideration
for him and that a key first step was getting the president to appoint an
official council. This is now part of the university makeup, with bylaws to
formalize the work. While bylaws can pigeonhole and restrain some efforts,
they also contribute to stability and sustainability. The other consideration
for sustainability, he said, is ensuring that there are resources available and
processes in place to continue efforts when dedicated leaders leave. There
is no magic answer, Moone said, but the most sustainable programs are
those that rely on a collaborative of people rather than on a few individuals.
Kim Dunleavy with the Department of Physical Therapy at the University
of Florida and representing the American Council of Academic
Physical
Therapy mentioned that her institution’s program pairs students
with older adults in the community, which can lead to instances of ageism
and mismatched expectations. Students are keen to help the adults with
specific projects around their homes, she said, but they often do not see
the social component as important. Jacqueline Kreinik, a nurse and subject
matter expert at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, said that
the first stage of working with older adults is listening. Students need to
set aside their expectations and focus on what matters most for the older
adults. Health professions students, as well as practitioners, often want to
jump in and make big changes to “be a hero,” but the older adult may want
the person to simply listen or to lend a helping hand.
Maxwell described a program at her institution called Frailty-Focused
Communication (Maxwell et al., 2022). Within this program, a workshop
gives students a more in-depth understanding of the process of ageing, and
there is a focus on communicating with older adults and using motivational
interviewing skills to discuss issues deemed important by this population.
Students are paired with an older adult in the community and then encouraged
to develop a relationship and a friendship. A recent publication gives
details on the program (Miller et al., 2022). Following up on Maxwell’s
remarks,
Jennifer Cabrera, a workshop participant, agreed that communication
can be difficult between younger students or residents and older
adults. She noted that older adults can get “left behind” because they
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
50 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
cannot keep up with the pace and that getting younger residents to sit and
listen to an older patient for a few minutes can be a real challenge. Moone
responded by saying that a pivotal part of his experience was going to
undergraduate school on a campus with a nursing home. Most students
volunteered or worked at the home at some point, and being able to build
relationships, relate to other people, and build empathy are part of the
critical “soft skills” of education. The pinnacle of geriatrics, Moone said, is
helping health professions students build these types of critical skills so that
they are able to listen to their patients and discover what matters.
VIRTUAL INTERPROFESSIONAL CONSULTATION CLINIC
Kristen Hicks-Roof, an associate professor in the Department of Nutrition
and Dietetics at the University of North Florida, told participants about
how she and her colleagues developed the Virtual Interprofessional (VIP)
Consultation Clinic. It began, she said, with an interprofessional education
series (IPES), which consisted of discussion and education sessions that
focused
on topics including communication, role responsibility, and teambased
care. Participants included physical therapy residents, occupational
therapy residents, family medicine residents, and dietetic interns; they met
in a virtual environment in the years before this became common during
COVID-
19. IPES used hypothetical case examples to guide discussions,
Hicks-Roof said, but numerous trainees participants requested real-life interactions
with patients.
Based on this and other feedback, the VIP Consultation
Clinic was developed.
The VIP experience (Figure 4-2) begins with an orientation session focusing
on roles and responsibilities. Hicks-Roof described research showing
that if health professionals are not aware of what other health professionals
actually do, they are less likely to refer patients to them or work together. In
the orientation participants are taught about who other health professionals
are, how they are educated, and where and how they work. This facilitates
greater understanding and respect among the group, she said. After orientation,
groups of learners participate in VIP sessions with patients. These sessions
consist of an introduction to the process, multiple 5- to 8-minute patient
assessments, and questions, followed by an interprofessional discussion and
development of the clinical assessment notes without the patient present. Participating
residents are from a range of disciplines, including physical therapy,
occupational therapy, family medicine, nursing (D.N.P.), dietetics, and clinical
mental health counseling. Patients are usually referred, and they are paid $75
for their participation. The program does not specifically recruit older adults
as patients, but many participants are older, she said.
VIP participants are surveyed after the conclusion of the program, and
Hicks-Roof presented several findings based on these surveys. First, there
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 51
FIGURE 4-2 Virtual Interprofessional (VIP) Consultation Clinic learning model.
SOURCE: Hicks-Roof presentation, December 8, 2022.
is a strong perceived positive impact on future interprofessional collaborative
practice (Figure 4-3). This impact is particularly strong among mental
health counselors and registered dietitians; Hicks-Roof noted that these two
groups are newer to the world of interprofessional training. Second, most
participants were more likely to refer to the other professions after the program
than before. Again, the impact was greatest in the areas of nutrition
and mental health, which Hicks-Roof noted are of critical importance for
the health of older adults.
There were many advantages of the VIP clinic program, Hicks-Roof
said. Learners have an opportunity to train on virtual technology and
telehealth delivery and are exposed to older adults. Learners can participate
in real patient assessments and are able to discuss and reflect on the
assessments with an inclusive group of professionals. At the same time, the
patients gain access to a wide variety of expertise in one clinic visit, which
is quite uncommon. The program can be integrated into resident and intern
schedules and competencies, Hicks-Roof said. The challenges associated
with the program include recruitment of patients, scheduling VIP consults,
ensuring continuous care for patients, and technical issues in the virtual
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
52 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
FIGURE 4-3 Virtual Interprofessional (VIP) Consultation Clinic’s perceived positive
impact on future interprofessional collaboration.
SOURCE: Hicks-Roof presentation, December 8, 2022.
environment. The technical issues are a particular problem when working
with older adults, she said, who sometimes have more trouble navigating
virtual visits.
Hicks-Roof asked breakout group participants to share their thoughts
and questions. Greer asked how learner competencies and patient health
outcomes are measured. Hicks-Roof responded that learners are given preand
post-surveys with both quantitative and qualitative measures. Patients
participate in only two VIP clinics, so there is less information gathered on
them and their experience. Hicks-Roof said it would be helpful to follow
patients over a longer period to see whether and how the experience affects
their care. She posited that one benefit of participation for patients is simply
exposure to other types of health professionals, and she suggested that
patients may in the future ask their primary providers for referrals based on
their experiences. Kolasa added that this exposure goes both ways—health
professionals participating in the VIP clinic gain exposure to older adults
and get experience caring for this population. Greer commented that the
National Academies of Practice has developed interprofessional telehealth
competencies; these would be useful for measuring the impact of the VIP
program for learners, she said. In addition, she suggested that integrating
the VIP clinic with a patient’s primary care provider could make it possible
to track metrics and health outcomes (e.g., if a patient’s diabetes markers
improve after participation). Hicks-Roof agreed with Greer’s concerns and
said that a long-term vision is to create an embedded hybrid clinic within
the family medicine residency program, which could address the concerns
about measuring and tracking patient health outcomes.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 53
Hartley noted that the VIP program is grant-funded and asked Hicks-
Roof to comment on the value and sustainability of the program. Hicks-
Roof
responded that part of the reason for hoping to move to an embedded clinic
in the family medicine program is to ensure the sustainability of the program.
The idea, she said, would be for patients to be seen in person by family
medicine practitioners in addition to participating in an interdisciplinary
virtual session with other professionals. This could help with the continuity
of care for patients as well as with sustainability. Hartley said that integrating
the program into an existing care program could also potentially help
with the reproducibility and scalability of the VIP program. Nina Tomasa,
a workshop participant, closed the session by emphasizing that patients are
an integral part of the care team and that the VIP model ideally welcomes
patients in as part of the interprofessional collaboration.
CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
IN GERIATRIC CARE
Josea Kramer, the associate director for education/evaluation of the
geriatric research, education and clinical center (GRECC) at the Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, said
that GRECCs are congressionally mandated centers of excellence that were
established in the mid 1970s to meet the emerging “age wave” of older
veterans by advancing geriatrics and gerontology. Each of the 20 GRECCs
has a wide portfolio of clinical and research activities; the education component
includes clinical training and fellowships across a variety of health
professions as well as continuing education.
Kramer began the Geriatric Scholars Program in 2008 in response to
the IOM report Retooling for an Aging America, which emphasized the
importance of training the workforce that is already in place (IOM, 2008).
The program is grant-funded by the VA Office of Rural Health and VA
Office
of Geriatrics and Extended Care.
The Geriatric Scholars Program was developed with a focus on the general
primary care setting where most older veterans receive health care. The
pilot program enrolled only primary care providers and expanded to additional
disciplines within the medical home model of primary care, including
pharmacists, psychologists, social workers, rehabilitation therapists, and
psychiatrists. This national workforce development program evolved over
the years into its current structure (Figure 4-4) of five integrated components,
Kramer said. The core component focuses on individual clinicians
who receive an intensive didactic program in geriatrics and gerontology
along with an intensive workshop in quality improvement. Each participant
initiates a quality improvement project in his or her own local setting.
The quality improvement component gives participants an opportunity to
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
54
FIGURE 4-4 Geriatric Scholars Program.
SOURCE: Kramer presentation, December 8, 2022.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ADDRESSING THE GAP 55
become “ambassadors for change,” Kramer said, and provides “stealth education”
in teaching new knowledge to the local clinical team in implementing
quality improvement. One unique aspect is the longitudinal design
for
continuing education. The program is a longitudinal effort; after completing
this program, there are opportunities for alumni to continue additional
training and improve their skills over time. Immediately following the training,
at 6 months post-training, and then at intervals thereafter, program
participants are asked to self-identify learning gaps and additional topics
of interest for future training. Using this information, Kramer said, new
continuing education programs are developed annually; about 50 continuing
education programs are offered each year.
Other unique aspects are the range of continuing education training
opportunities
across a number of health care professions; most are accredited
as continuing medical education (CME) for VA and for non-VA participants
and are awarded continuing education units (CEUs). In addition
to training individual scholars, this national training program is intended to
improve geriatric care through interdisciplinary team-based training, distance
learning, dissemination, and pilot programs. Team-based training
teaches everyone in the clinic—lay and professional clinical staff—to recognize
common problems among older adults that may require immediate attention
during the clinical visit, to implement team-based solutions to care,
and to improve clinic efficiency. This component supports each discipline’s
critical role in patient interaction and making a difference in patients’ care.
Team training is offered to rural VA and Indian Health Service clinics as
well as to urban VA primary care teams. Distance learning efforts include
webinars, on-line resources, and simulations on such topics as dementia
and mental health; most of these programs are accredited for CME/CEU for
VA and for non-VA participants. The program’s innovation arm develops
and tests new educational programs; successful curricula are integrated
into the regular program offerings and new resources, and tools that prove
beneficial are disseminated. Around 1,400 scholars have completed the core
Geriatric Scholars Program, and about 7,500 individuals have been reached
through the team-based training and distance learning efforts, Kramer said.
Kramer described some lessons learned from the Geriatric Scholars
Program. Being nimble and innovating quickly is critical, she said, and it is
important to avoid mission drift. The longitudinal model can be adapted
or adopted in other health systems. For example, the Indian Health Service
is currently implementing its version of the Geriatric Scholars Program to
meet a need to enhance geriatric expertise across its national health care
system.
Martin MacDowell, a workshop participant, asked Kramer about how
wellness and health promotion fit into the Geriatric Scholars Program. So
many of the health issues of older adults, he said, are avoidable if people
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
56 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
receive accurate and timely information about improving their health.
Kramer responded that the VA has a strong emphasis on whole health and
integrated health and that while this is not a major focus of the Geriatric
Scholars Program, it is part of the overall environment and is included
in many aspects of the program. Another workshop participant, Jennifer
Cabrera,
followed up on this by saying that the physical therapy department
is often underused in this population and that physical therapists can
be a great resource for helping older adults stay active and healthy. Physical
therapy is often an “afterthought” once someone is diagnosed and needs
rehabilitation, she said, but it should be used earlier to prevent health problems
and reduce the impact of disease on quality of life. Cathy Maxwell
added that there is a need for more education so that adults understand the
processes their bodies go through as they age and can take the proper steps
to take care of their health. While most people know they should not smoke
or be sedentary, they need a better understanding of why these behaviors
lead to poor health and how they can make a change for healthier aging.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Key Messages Made by Presenters
• Adopting an implementation science strategy requires identifying
the contextual factors that either facilitate or challenge improvement
of outcomes as well as the strategies that could be used to take
advantage the facilitators and address the challenges. (Binagwaho)
• Health professions education should rest on sound educational
strategies and pedagogies, and implementation science can be used
to ensure that evidence-based approaches are effectively implemented
into educational strategies, considering the local context
as well as facilitators and barriers to change. (Thomas)
• Although the results of the service-learning study were encouraging,
what was absent was the use of an explicit implementation
science lens from the beginning. (Douglas)
This workshop, said Zohray Talib, the senior associate dean of academic
affairs at the California University of Science and Medicine, has brought the
concept of design thinking into the space of health professions education.
During this workshop, she continued, speakers and attendees have heard
from older adults about their lives and their needs, have identified a mismatch
between the care needs of older adults and the health care workforce that will
serve them, and have explored a number of “fantastic examples” of innovative
programs and models that are making a difference. The next step, she
said, is to take these best practices and expand, scale, and adapt them in new
contexts. Doing this successfully will require using implementation science.
5
Making It Happen with
Implementation Science
57
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
58 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
In this session of the workshop, speakers described implementation science
and how it can be used to promote the uptake of evidence-based practices to
improve health professions education and training and, in turn, improve and
strengthen the workforce to care for older adults.
THE IMPORTANCE OF IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE
The process of translating research findings into health outcomes is not
automatic, said Agnes Binagwaho, a former vice chancellor and co-founder
of the University of Global Health Equity, Partners in Health, Rwanda.
Using
the example of medical products, she said the process starts with
basic science discoveries. Once promising evidence has been found, funds—
usually private—are allocated toward the development and manufacture of
medical products that can improve health outcomes. However, if the products
do not reach the population, health outcomes will not improve. For
example, vaccines were quickly developed in response to the COVID-19
crisis, but vaccination rates are low in many parts of the world. In most
areas, the well-educated and higher-income populations are more likely to
be vaccinated, and those most vulnerable—including the elderly and health
professionals—were not prioritized. In addition, thousands of vaccine doses
expired in developed countries while people in developing countries could
not access them. Implementation science is critical for making sure that
research discoveries reach the intended target and have a positive impact,
she said.
Binagwaho gave a formal definition of implementation research:
“Implementation
research is defined as the scientific study of the use of
strategies to adopt and integrate evidence-based health interventions into
clinical and community settings to improve individual outcomes and benefit
population health.”1 There are various frameworks to describe implementation
science, she said; the framework in Figure 5-1 describes it as taking
place in five phases.
The first step is exploration, she said; in this phase, stakeholders explore
the contextual factors and the problem at hand. The second phase,
preparation, involves selecting evidence-based interventions that are appropriate
for the local context. Collaboration with different stakeholders
is essential to ensure a realistic approach as, Binagwaho said, no sector
can solve the problem alone. In the third step, implementation, a strategy
is selected to ensure coverage of the intervention. The adaptation phase
requires monitoring and evaluation to understand when, how, and why
to adapt the intervention and the strategy in order to get the expected results.
Finally, in the sustainment phase, stakeholders decide how to ensure
1 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-19-274.html (accessed March 7, 2022).
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
MAKING IT HAPPEN WITH IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE 59
FIGURE 5-1 Implementation science framework.
SOURCE: Binagwaho presentation, November 17, 2022.
long-term implementation and sustainable outcomes through integrating
the intervention into systems and policies.
Adopting an implementation science strategy requires identifying the
contextual factors that either facilitate or challenge the improvement of outcomes
as well as the strategies that could be used to take advantage of the
facilitators and address the challenges. Taking the example of emerging
health needs in an aging population, Binagwaho said that one challenging
contextual factor is that longer lifespans decrease the incidence of deaths
from communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional diseases while
increasing the incidence of deaths from non-communicable diseases. Strategies
to address this challenge could include health awareness and prevention
programs as well as long-term and end-of-life care. An implementation
science approach also identifies facilitating contextual factors, Binagwaho
said. For example, there is a strong community health worker program in
Rwanda; strategies to take advantage of this strength could include having
these workers conduct follow-ups for patients with chronic diseases or
distributing drugs at the community level.
Once an intervention is implemented, its success must be evaluated
across various dimensions. Binagwaho adapted Proctor et al.’s (2011) proposed
implementation outcomes list to include:
• Appropriateness
• Acceptability
• Cost-effectiveness
• Coverage
• Effectiveness
• Equity
• Feasibility
• Fidelity
• Sustainability
She further emphasized that it is important to evaluate these outcomes in
relation to each other. For example, a program that is cost-effective could
be highly inequitable.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
60 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
There is a need to build implementation science capacity at all levels of
the health system, Binagwaho said. A country with a health workforce that is
capable of doing research and implementing known evidence-based interventions
will have a strong health system and will be ready to respond to new
challenges, including the health needs of an aging population. Stakeholders
who should be knowledgeable about implementation science include health
care workers, systems managers, policy makers, and researchers. There is a
strong economic argument for building implementation science capacity, she
said: building capacity facilitates the use of all known evidence-based interventions
and implementation strategies. This is key, she said, in strengthening
health systems and ultimately contributes to economic development. In addition,
there is a cyclical relationship between economic development, poverty
reduction, and health. As the population becomes healthier, the production
capacity of the country increases, which in turn promotes economic development
and poverty reduction, leading to improved health.
THE ROLE OF IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE IN
HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION
Aliki Thomas, an associate professor at the School of Physical and Occupational
Therapy and an associate member of the Institute of Health Sciences
Education, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill University,
shared her perspective on implementation science and how it can be used to
improve health professions education. Thomas described the process of translating
research into practice as occurring in three phases (Figure 5-2). Phase
1 involves identifying the nature and the magnitude of the research–practice
gap; that is, to what extent do current educational practices vary from best
practices supported by evidence? Phase 2 identifies factors that support or
inhibit the use of evidence to inform practice; these factors may be at the individual,
organizational, or systems level. For example, individual factors could
be attitudes towards best practices or the skills to offer them; organizational
factors could be the resources available to implement best practices; and systems
factors could be accreditation standards that either facilitate or present
a barrier to evidence-based educational practice. In Phase 3, interventions to
reduce the research-practice gap are designed, implemented, and evaluated.
In this step, Thomas said, it is critical to consider a number of questions:
• What do you want your intervention to achieve and for whom?
• What constitutes the intervention?
• How do you propose the intervention will work?
• How will you deliver the intervention?
• How will the intervention be evaluated? What does success look
like?
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
MAKING IT HAPPEN WITH IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE 61
FIGURE 5-2 Moving evidence into educational practice and policy.
SOURCE: Thomas presentation, November 17, 2022.
Thomas described how implementation science could be applied specifically
to the challenge of preparing the health professions workforce
to meet the needs of an aging population. In Phase 1, the goal would be
to document the current educational strategies used in health professions
education and determine how these differ from what is recommended in
the literature. This could be accomplished through examining accreditation
reports, reviewing evidence on the learner outcomes of interest, and mapping
current practices to the existing evidence on the specific educational
strategy. Phase 2 would involve exploring the perceived facilitators and
barriers in implementing a new educational strategy or pedagogy. Methods
could include interviews, focus groups, or a survey of faculty; and the barriers
and facilitators could include available resources, support from faculty
or leadership, and community partnerships. Based on the first two steps,
Phase 3 would involve designing interventions that take advantage of the
facilitators and aim to overcome the barriers to the uptake of a new educational
strategy. Designers could use frameworks such as the Consolidated
Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR) to guide this process. In
the particular area of preparing the workforce to care for older adults, the
barriers to address would likely include learner attitudes, the confidence
of the faculty to teach the topic, and having limited time or resources to
support teachers in their efforts to prepare learners. There are multiple
strategies to address these barriers, she said, including faculty development,
webinars, and stories or testimonials of successful implementation projects.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
62 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Health professions education should rest on sound educational strategies
and pedagogies, Thomas said, and implementation science can be used
to ensure that evidence-based approaches are effectively implemented into
educational strategies, considering the local context as well as facilitators
and barriers to change.
CASE STUDY: SERVICE LEARNING AS PEDAGOGY
FOR CHANGING ATTITUDES
In this session, Natalie Douglas, a faculty member of communication
sciences and disorders at Central Michigan University, presented her
work measuring the impact of a service-learning project on students’ attitudes
about working with older adults. This presentation was designed to
frame the roundtable discussion taking place after Douglas’ remarks, said
Thomas, who moderated the session. Douglas began by saying that she has
long thought about implementation science from a research lens but had
not considered how implementation science could be used to support the
education she provides to her students. This service-learning project, she
said, was not conducted with an implementation science lens; she expressed
her hope that by the end of the workshop session, participants could help
identify ways that implementation science would improve the implementation
and outcomes of the project.
As other speakers have noted, students often have prejudiced and
stereotypical
attitudes about working with older people, Douglas said. She
shared a quote from an undergraduate student:
Before arriving [to the nursing home], I pretty much thought I was
going to a mental hospital. I thought the residents were going to be
these hollow husks of a person, and I was going there to entertain
them for a bit.
Ageist attitudes like this, she said, may steer students in health care
professions away from working with older adults. To improve student attitudes
in this area, Douglas and her colleagues developed a service-learning
approach that combined classroom instruction with real-world experiences.
Research demonstrates that these types of real-world experiences, designed
to expose students to older adults, can have a positive impact on their attitudes.
In addition, service learning is designed to be mutually beneficial to
both the learner and the community or individuals the learner is serving
and to provide opportunities for critical reflection.
The aims of Douglas’s study were to determine whether the attitudes
of undergraduate students changed after a service-learning experience in
which they engaged with older adults. Shifts in attitude were evaluated
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
MAKING IT HAPPEN WITH IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE 63
using the Dementia Attitudes Scale and reflective journal entries. The study
was rooted in the AAA framework (Mahendra et al., 2013), Douglas said.
The first A stands for awareness; the experience was designed to emphasize
the acquisition of knowledge and self-reflection on gaps in knowledge.
The second A is application; during preparatory training, Douglas and her
colleagues sought to develop interactional skills with older adults as well
as develop reflective skills that could improve clinical practices in general.
The third A stands for advocacy or attitude; researchers were interested in
exploring whether and how attitudes shifted as students underwent these
experiences.
This project involved 145 undergraduate students across two midwestern
universities. The students were all majoring in communication sciences
and disorders, and 23 percent reported having previous experience working
with adults with dementia. The mean age of participants was 21.5 years,
and 141 of the participants were female. Over the course of a semester,
students spent between 15 and 30 hours interacting with individuals living
with dementia in long-term care environments. Students engaged in a variety
of activities, including conversation, activities related to the individual’s
hobbies or interests, crafts, games, and sensory activities (e.g., holding a
hand, combing hair). Students were trained in all of these activities prior
to their interactions, including specific ways to communicate with patients
with dementia, such as TimeSlips or using photos or gestures to communicate.
Conducting the program required resources for classroom instruction,
on-site coaching and support, partnerships with communities that wanted
students to visit, and physical space for the students and older individuals
to interact.
Douglas shared the results of the study. Students wrote journal entries
over the course of the project, and the first, third, and fifth entries were
coded for positive, negative, and neutral attitudes. As seen in Figure 5-3,
the proportion of positive attitudes in journal entries increased as time went
on, while the proportion of negative attitudes decreased. Results from the
Dementia Attitudes Scale confirmed these attitude shifts, Douglas said.
In closing, Douglas again shared the earlier quote from a participating
student, but this time included his final line:
Before arriving [to the nursing home], I pretty much thought I was
going to a mental hospital. I thought the residents were going to be
these hollow husks of a person, and I was going there to entertain
them for a bit. I couldn’t have been more wrong.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
64 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
FIGURE 5-3 Distribution of positive, negative, and neutral attitude codes for journal
entries one, three, and five.
SOURCE: Douglas presentation, November 17, 2022. Heuer et al. (2020), reprinted
with permission.
Discussion
Although the results of the service-learning study were encouraging,
Douglas said, what was absent was the use of an explicit implementation
science lens from the beginning. Douglas and Thomas asked roundtable
discussants to share their thoughts on using implementation science to systemically
transform education, using both Douglas’s study as well as their
own experiences as examples. Each panelist was asked to describe his or
her own experiences with service-learning projects and to describe the facilitators
and barriers that they encountered when implementing these projects.
Thomas began by asking Douglas to use an implementation science lens
and describe any facilitators or barriers that were identified when implementing
the project. Douglas replied that there were a number of logistical
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
MAKING IT HAPPEN WITH IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE 65
barriers, including facility rules that required students to complete paperwork
and medical testing before volunteering, finding the right point person
in the care community, and finding times for visits that worked for both
students and the care facility. An unexpected challenge, Douglas said, was
the ethical difficulty of creating “beautiful relationships” that could only
last for 15 weeks. A facilitator for both universities was the community
engagement support each received from their institutions. The schools were
applying for a community engagement classification, which created a high
level of motivation to conduct this project. Another facilitator, Douglas
said, was the relationships with the community care centers and the benefits
that they saw from participating in the project. For example, some community
care centers saw student participants as potential future employees.
Thomas asked other panelists to talk about their own projects and to
describe the relevant facilitators and barriers. Toby Brooks, the assistant
dean for faculty development at Texas Tech University Health Science
within the Athletic Training Program, talked about his work in the graduate
program on athletic training. Students in this program have the opportunity
to work with patients across the age spectrum, and one challenge is educating
the public and other health care professionals on their role in care.
In recent years, he said, the program has focused on developing clinicians
as educators and helping them acquire teaching skills at the same time as
they acquire their clinical skills. Brooks divided facilitators and barriers
into individual, organizational, and system-level determinants. Individual
determinants include the formation and resilience of knowledge, skills, and
abilities of individuals, and an individual and organizational determinant
is the role of beliefs in the formation or development of practices. Brooks
said that educating students with new knowledge and skills “doesn’t do
any good” if their underlying beliefs remain unchanged. An organizational
determinant
is the impact of program culture on accountability and
outcomes, and systems-level determinants are the factors specific to the
profession of athletic training (e.g., third-party reimbursement and the job
market). Brooks said that the practices of implementation science are a
useful way to see if health professions educators are “moving the needle”
and making a difference.
Kim Dunleavy of the Department of Physical Therapy at the University
of Florida, who was also representing the American Council of Academic
Physical Therapy, said there are a number of different service-learning
opportunities
at her institution. These include interprofessional home visits,
a community walking program, low-income housing chair exercise classes,
balance and falls activities at a senior center, adaptive gymnastics, and a pro
bono clinic. Some of these activities focus on older adults, while others do
not; as a result, not all students gain experience engaging with this population.
Dunleavy considered the question of whether the service-learning
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
66 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
project model that Douglas described could be adapted for use in her community
to improve learner attitudes toward working with older adults.
Facilitators of this work would be the service-learning programs already
in place, a number of existing classes related to the topic, and an established
practice of encouraging reflective thinking in conjunction with service
projects.
Barriers might include the need for faculty supervision and faculty
debriefing, challenges in integrating the model into existing coursework,
and identifying a validated tool for capturing attitudes about working with
older adults across the spectrum.
Dietitians work in a wide variety of settings and with a wide variety of
populations, including many older adults, said Hannah Wilson, an assistant
professor in the Department of Nutrition, Dietetics, and Exercise Science
at Concordia College. At Concordia College, she said, it is a high priority
to train students to be interested in working with this population and to be
comfortable working in all types of settings. There are a variety of servicelearning
opportunities in both the undergraduate and graduate nutrition
programs, including working with programs like Meals on Wheels. Facilitators
of these kinds of opportunities, Wilson said, include a university-wide
requirement for PEAKs (pivotal experiences in applied knowledge) and a
graduate-level requirement for at least 1,200 supervised practice hours.
There are also a number of barriers, she said, including a shortage of registered
dieticians in older adult settings to serve as preceptors, a limited
number of sites, the cost of testing and paperwork, and scheduling. The college
has found creative solutions to overcome some of these barriers, such
as using preceptors who are not dietitians and coordinating with nearby
“competing” programs in order to find placements for all students.
CLOSING
In closing the workshop, Talib spoke on behalf of the Global Forum
on Innovation in Health Professional Education’s co-chairs and members,
saying the challenge of building a strong health professions workforce to
meet the needs of a growing aging population is not a distant possibility. “It
is already upon us,” he said, and it is time to use implementation science to
take evidence-based approaches for strengthening the workforce and move
them into day-to-day health professions education practice. Throughout
this workshop, Talib said, he was reminded of a previous workshop that
took a design thinking approach to explore stress and burnout in the health
workforce. The idea was to bring design thinking—empathize, define,
ideate,
prototype and test—into the space of health professions education.
In reflecting upon that workshop, Talib said she believed that this
workshop took a similar design thinking approach to the issues of educating
learners and health professionals on caring for an aging population.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
MAKING IT HAPPEN WITH IMPLEMENTATION SCIENCE 67
First, there was empathy. “We collectively brought a group of people
together who are already naturally empathetic,” she said. “But also, we
heard the voices of our older adults and the learners themselves to really
empathize with the issue.” This is where the concept of design thinking
begins, with the beneficiaries of our work front and center, she remarked.
In the second part, the presenters defined quantitatively and qualitatively
the status of the health workforce, the health system, and push and pull factors
affecting the ability of health professionals to meet the needs of older
adults. This led to then ideating and prototyping. “I think we’ve heard a
great number of fantastic examples,” Talib said, which demonstrated the
challenges facing health professionals trying to meet the needs of an aging
population. The final step of a design thinking model is to test, but an additional
element could be to disseminate.
There are a lot of available resources, Talib observed, and now is the
time to access those resources or prototypes already in use in the educational
health system and apply implementation science to establish best
practices for moving forward in training health professionals to address
the needs of an aging population through health professions education.
With that final thought, Talib thanked speakers, panelists, and workshop
participants and adjourned the workshop.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
AAMC (Association of American Medical Colleges). 2018. 2018 Physician specialty data
report: Executive summary. https://www.aamc.org/data-reports/workforce/data/2018-
physician-specialty-data-report-executive-summary (accessed April 22, 2023).
AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving. 2020. Caregiving in the United States 2020.
https://www.aarp.org/ppi/info-2020/caregiving-in-the-united-states.html.
Administration for Community Living. 2022. Profile of Older Americans. https://acl.gov/aging-
and-disability-in-america/data-and-research/profile-older-americans (accessed
April 22, 2023).
Alzheimer’s Association. 2023 Alzheimer’s Disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s & Dementia
19(4):1598–695. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.13016.
Arias, E., B. Bastian, J. Xu, and B. Tejada-Vera. 2021. U.S. State Life Tables, 2018. Hyattsville,
MD: Center for Health Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr70/nvsr70-1-
508.pdf.
Aronson, L. 2019. Elderhood: Redefining aging, transforming medicine, reimagining life. New
York: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Ben-Ur, E. 2020. The innovator’s compass. https://innovatorscompass.org (accessed April 22,
2023).
Cesari, M., I. Araujo de Carvalho, J. Amuthavalli Thiyagarajan, C. Cooper, F. C. Martin,
J. Y. Reginster, B. Vellas, and J. R. Beard. 2018. Evidence for the domains supporting
the construct of intrinsic capacity. Journal of Gerontology, A: Biological Sciences and
Medical Sciences 73(12):1653–1660.
Chang, E. S., S. Kannoth, S. Levy, S.-Y. Wang, J. E. Lee, and B. R. Levy. 2020. Global reach
of ageism on older persons’ health: A systematic review. PLOS ONE 15(1):e0220857.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0220857.
Crestani, C., V. Masotti, N. Corradi, M. L. Schirripa, and R. Cecchi.
2019. Suicide in the
elderly: A 37-years retrospective study. Acta Biomedica Atenei Parmensis 90(1):68–76.
https://doi.org/10.23750/abm.v90i1.6312.
A
References
69
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
70 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Dawson, C. M. P., A. O. Abiola, A. M. Sullivan, A. W. Schwartz, and members of the GERI
Team Research Group. 2022. You can’t be what you can’t see: A systematic website
review of geriatrics online visibility at U.S. medical schools. Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society 70(10):2996–3005.
Gerontological Society of America. 2023. Age-Friendly University (AFU) global network. https://
www.geron.org/programs-services/education-center/age-friendly-university-afu-global-network
(accessed June 7, 2023).
Franceschi, C., P. Garagnani, C. Morsiani, M. Conte, A. Santoro, A. Grignolio, D. Monti, M.
Capri, and S. Salvioli. 2018. The continuum of aging and age-related diseases: Common
mechanisms but different rates. Frontiers in Medicine 5:61.
Hebditch, M., S. Daley, J. Wright, G. Sherlock, J. Scott, and S. Banerjee. 2020. Preferences of
nursing and medical students for working with older adults and people with dementia:
A systematic review. BMC Medical Education 20(1):92.
Heuer, S., N. Douglas, T. Burney, and R. Willer. 2020. Service-learning with older adults in
care communities: Measures of attitude shifts in undergraduate students. Gerontology
& Geriatrics Education 41(2):186–199.
IHI (Institute for Healthcare Improvement). 2020. Age-friendly health systems resources to
practice age-friendly care. https://www.ihi.org/Engage/Initiatives/Age-Friendly-Health-
Systems/Pages/Resources.aspx (accessed January 18, 2023).
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2008. Retooling for an aging America: Building the health care
workforce. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Jimenez, E. Y., J. M. Long, E. Lamers-Johnson, L. Woodcock, C. Bliss, J. Lee, J. Scott Parrott,
R. K. Hand, K. Kelley, J. K. Abram, and A. Steiber. 2022. Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics Nutrition Research Network: Rationale and protocol for a study to validate the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics/American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
consensus-derived diagnostic indicators for adult and pediatric malnutrition and to
determine optimal registered dietitian nutritionist staffing in acute care hospital settings.
Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 122(3):630–639.
Lortie, D. C. 1975. Schoolteacher. A sociological study. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Mahendra, N., K. Fremont, and E. Dionne. 2013. Teaching future providers about dementia:
The impact of service learning. Seminars in Speech and Language 34(1):5–17.
Maxwell, C., S. Miller, and D. Lee. 2022. Frailty-focused communication (FCOM) for older
adults. Innovation in Aging 6(Suppl 1):221–222.
Miller, S., D. A. Lee, S. Muhimpundu, and C. A. Maxwell. 2022. Developing and pilot testing
a frailty-focused education and communication training workshop. PEC Innovation
1:100013.
Mitchell, L., M. R. Frank, K. D. Harris, P. Sheridan Dodds, and C. M. Danforth. 2013. The
geography of happiness: Connecting Twitter sentiment
and expression, demographics,
and objective characteristics of place. PLOS ONE 8(5):e64417. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0064417.
Nash, R. J., and E. R. Ducharme. 1975. A sociologist looks at teachers: Careers, realities,
and dreams. Review of Dan C. Lortie, Schoolteacher. A sociological study, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1975. Journal of Teacher Education 26(4):360–363.
NHCGNE (National Hartford Center of Gerontological Nursing Excellence). 2019. Core competencies
for gerontological nurse educators. https://www.nhcgne.org/core-competenciesfor-
gerontological-nursing-excellence (accessed on January 18, 2023).
O’Connor, M. L., and S. H. McFadden. 2010. Development and psychometric validation of
the Dementia Attitudes Scale. International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 2010:454218.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX A 71
PHI. 2023. Workforce Data Center. https://www.phinational.org/policy-research/workforcedata-
center/#tab=National+Data&states=01&var=Employment+Trends&natvar=
Employment+Projections (accessed June 7, 2023).
Proctor, E., H. Silmere, R. Raghavan, P. Hovmand, G. Aarons, A. Bunger, R. Griffey, and
M. Hensley. 2011. Outcomes for implementation research: Conceptual distinctions,
measurement challenges, and research agenda. Administration and Policy in Mental
Health and Mental Health Services Research 38(2):65–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10488-010-0319-7.
Roth, S. 2022. New US population study projects steep rise in cardiovascular diseases by 2060.
https://www.acc.org/About-ACC/Press-Releases/2022/08/01/16/37/New-US-populationstudy-
projects-steep-rise-in-cardiovascular-diseases-by-2060 (accessed April 22, 2023).
Rowe, J. W. 2021. The U.S. eldercare workforce is falling further behind. Nature Aging
1(4):327–329.
Siddiqui, M. J., C. S. Min, R. K. Verma, and S. Q. Jamshed. 2014. Role of complementary
and alternative medicine in geriatric care: A mini review. Pharmacognosy Reviews
8(16):81–87.
Spetz, J., and N. Dudley. 2019. Consensus-based recommendations for an adequate workforce
to care for people with serious illness. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
67(S2):S392–S399.
Stubbe, D. E. 2020. Practicing cultural competence and cultural humility in the care of diverse
patients. FOCUS 18(1):49-51. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.focus.
20190041.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2022. Healthcare Occupations. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/
healthcare/home.htm (accessed June 2, 2023).
Vespa, J., L. Medina, and D. M. Armstrong. 2020. Demographic Turning Points for the
United States: Population Projections for 2020 to 2060. Current Population Reports pp.
25–1144. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Wager, E., I. Telesford, P. Hughes-Cromwick, K. Amin, and C. Cox. 2023. What impact
has the coronavirus pandemic had on health employment? Kaiser Family Foundation.
https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/what-impact-has-the-coronaviruspandemic-
had-on-healthcare-employment/ (accessed April 22, 2023).
WHO (World Health Organization). 2017. WHO Clinical Consortium on Healthy Ageing.
Topic focus: Frailty and intrinsic capacity. Geneva: World Health Organization.
WHO. 2021. Global Campaign to Combat Ageism—Toolkit. Geneva: World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/global-campaign-to-combat-
ageismtoolkit
(accessed April 22, 2023).
WHO. 2022. Ageing and Health. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ageing-andhealth#:~:
text=By%202050%2C%20the%20world’s%20population,2050%20to%20
reach%20426%20million (accessed June 2, 2023).
Zhou, Y., and L. Ma. 2022. Intrinsic capacity in older adults: Recent advances. Aging and
Disease 13(2):353–359.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
B
Members of the Global Forum
on Innovation in Health
Professional Education1,2
Patrick DeLeon, Ph.D., M.P.H., J.D. (Cochair)
Distinguished Professor of Uniformed Health Care Policy and Research
F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine and the Graduate School of Nursing
Uniformed Services University
Zohray Talib, M.D. (Cochair)
Chair, Department of Medical Education; Senior Associate Dean of
Academic Affairs; Professor of Medical Education and Internal
Medicine
California University of Science and Medicine, School of Medicine
Jonathan “Yoni” Amiel, M.D.
Interim Co-Vice Dean for Education
Senior Associate Dean for Curricular Affairs
Columbia Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons
Anthony R. Artino Jr., Ph.D.
Professor, Health and Human Function
George Washington University
1 The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s forums and roundtables
do not issue, review, or approve individual documents. The responsibility for the published
Proceedings of a Workshop rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.
2 Forum sponsors and in-kind donators identified in italics.
73
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
74 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
David Benton, R.G.N., Ph.D., FFNF, FRCN, FAAN
Chief Executive Officer
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
Agnes Binagwaho, M.D., M.(Ped.), Ph.D.
Vice Chancellor and Professor of the Practice of Global Health Delivery
University of Global Health Equity
Tanya Smith Brice
Vice President of Education
Council on Social Work Education
Reamer L. Bushardt, Pharm.D., PA-C, DFAAPA
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs
MGH Institute of Health Professions
Robert Cain, D.O.
Chief Executive Officer
American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine
Kathy Chappell, Ph.D., R.N., FNAP, FAAN
Senior Vice President
Certification/Measurement, Accreditation, and Institute for Credentialing
Research
American Nurses Credentialing Center
Steven Chesbro, PT, D.P.T., Ed.D.
Vice President for Education
American Physical Therapy Association
Darla Spence Coffey, M.S.W., Ph.D.
President
Council on Social Work Education
Darrin D’Agostino, D.O., M.P.H., M.B.A.
Provost and Chief Academic Officer
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine
Sanjay Desai, M.D.
Chief Academic Officer and Group Vice President of Medical Education
American Medical Association
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX B 75
Jan de Maeseneer, M.D., Ph.D., FRCGP (Hon.)
National Academy of Medicine Member
Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
Ghent University (Belgium)
Head WHO Collaborating Centre on Family Medicine and PHC—Ghent
University
Kylie P. Dotson-Blake, Ph.D., NCC, LPC
President and Chief Executive Officer
NBCC, Inc., and Affiliates
National Board for Certified Counselors, Inc., and Affiliates
Kim Dunleavy, Ph.D., MOMT, PT, OCS
Associate Clinical Professor
Director, Professional Education and Community Engagement
Department of Physical Therapy
University of Florida
American Council of Academic Physical Therapy
Kathrin (Katie) Eliot, Ph.D., R.D.
Director
Health Professions Educator
The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
Sara E. Fletcher, Ph.D.
Vice President and Chief Learning Officer
Physician Assistant Education Association
Elizabeth (Liza) Goldblatt, Ph.D., M.P.A./H.A.
Founding Board Member
Academic Collaborative for Integrative Health
Catherine L. Grus, Ph.D.
Deputy Executive Director for Education
American Psychological Association
Anita Gupta, D.O., Pharm.D., M.P.P.
Head, Chief, Comprehensive Pain Management
Scripps MD Anderson Cancer Center
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
76 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Kendra Harrington, PT, D.P.T., M.S.
Board-Certified Clinical Specialist in Women’s Health Physical Therapy
Director, Residency/Fellowship Accreditation
American Board of Physical Therapy Residency and Fellowship Education
American Physical Therapy Association
Neil Harvison, Ph.D., OTR/L, FAOTA
Chief Academic and Scientific Affairs Officer
American Occupational Therapy Association
Eric Holmboe, M.D.
Senior Vice President
Milestones Development and Evaluation
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
Lisa Howley, M.Ed., Ph.D.
Senior Director of Strategic Initiatives and Partnerships
Association of American Medical Colleges
Cheryl L. Hoying, Ph.D., R.N., NEA-BC, FAONL, FACHE, FAAN
Senior Consultant
Values Coach Inc.
National League for Nursing
Holly Humphrey, M.D.
President
Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation
Emilia Iwu, M.S.N., R.N., APNC, FWACN
Ph.D. Scholar
Rutgers University
Nasreen Jessani, D.P.H, Ms.P.H.
Associate Faculty
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Faculty: Senior Researcher
Stellenbosch University
Phyllis M. King, Ph.D., OT, FAOTA, FASAHP
Associate Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Chair
Association of Schools Advancing Health Professions
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX B 77
Kathryn (Kathy) Kolasa, Ph.D., RDN, LDN
Professor Emeritus and Master Educator Department of Family
Medicine–Nutrition and Patient Education
East Carolina University Brody School of Medicine
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
Albert Lee, M.D., M.P.H., FRCP
Professor (Clinical)
JC School of Public Health and Primary Care
Director
Centre for Health Education and Health Promotion
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Kimberly Lomis, M.D.
Vice President for Undergraduate Medical Education Innovations
American Medical Association
Beverly Malone, Ph.D., R.N., FAAN
National Academy of Medicine Member
Chief Executive Officer
National League for Nursing
Mary E. (Beth) Mancini, R.N., Ph.D., N.E.-B.C., FAHA, ANEF, FAAN
Associate Dean and Chair, Undergraduate Nursing Programs
Baylor Professor for Healthcare Research
The University of Texas at Arlington
College of Nursing
Past President
Society for Simulation in Healthcare
Dawn M. Mancuso, MAM, CAE, FASAE
Executive Director
Association of Schools and Colleges of Optometry
Angelo McClain, Ph.D., LICSW
Chief Executive Officer
National Association of Social Workers
Lemmietta G. McNeilly, Ph.D., CCC-SLP, CAE
Chief Staff Officer, Speech-Language Pathology
ASHA Fellow
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
78 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Mark Merrick, Ph.D., ATC, FNATA
Professor and Dean
College of Health and Human Services
University of Toledo
Athletic Training Strategic Alliance
Suzanne Miyamoto, Ph.D., R.N., FAAN
Chief Executive Officer
American Academy of Nursing
Warren Newton, M.D., M.P.H.
President and Chief Executive Officer Elect
American Board of Family Medicine
Loretta Nunez, M.A., Au.D., CCC-A/SLP, FNAP
ASHA Fellow
Director of Academic Affairs and Research Education
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
David O’Bryon, J.D., CAE
President
Association of Chiropractic Colleges
Immediate-Past Chair
Academic Collaborative for Integrative Health
Bjorg Palsdottir, M.P.A.
Executive Director and Cofounder
Training for Health Equity Network
Erin Patel, Psy.D., ABPP
Acting Chief of Health Professions Education
Veterans Health Administration
Andrea L. Pfeifle, Ed.D., PT, FNAP
Associate Vice President for Interprofessional Practice and Education
The Ohio State University and Wexner Medical Center
National Academies of Practice
Senthil Rajasekaran, M.D., MMHPE
Chief Academic Officer and Associate Dean, Academic Affairs at the
Khalifa University
College of Medicine and Health Sciences in Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX B 79
Rajata Rajatanavin, M.D., FAC
Minister of Public Health
Government of Thailand
Sabrina Salvant, Ed.D., M.P.H., OTR/L
Director of Accreditation
American Occupational Therapy Association
Stephen Schoenbaum, M.D., M.P.H.
Special Advisor to the President
Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation
Joanne G. Schwartzberg, M.D.
Scholar-in-Residence
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME)
Wendi Schweiger, Ph.D., NCC, LPC
Director, NBCC International Capacity Building
Foundation and Professional Services
National Board for Certified Counselors, Inc., and Affiliates
Javaid I. Sheikh, M.D., M.B.A.
Dean
Weill Cornell Medicine–Qatar
Carl J. Sheperis, Ph.D.
Dean, College of Education and Human Development
The Texas A&M University–San Antonio
Jeffrey Stewart, D.D.S, M.S.
Senior Vice President for Interprofessional and Global Collaboration
American Dental Education Association
Melissa Trego, D.O. Ph.D.
Dean
Salus University, Pennsylvania College of Optometry
Association of Schools and Colleges of Optometry
Carole Tucker, Ph.D., M.S.
Associate Professor in the College of Public Health and the College of
Engineering
Temple University
American Council of Academic Physical Therapy
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
80 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Richard Weisbarth, O.D., FAAO, FNAP
Vice President, Professional Affairs for CIBA Vision Corporation
Alcon
President
National Academies of Practice
Karen P. West, D.M.D., M.P.H.
President and Chief Executive Officer
American Dental Education Association
Alison J. Whelan, M.D.
Chief Medical Education Officer
Association of American Medical Colleges
Global Forum Staff
Patricia Cuff, M.P.H., M.S.
Forum Director and Senior Program Officer
Board on Global Health
Hannah Goodtree
Research Associate
Board on Global Health
Julie Pavlin, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H.
Director
Board on Global Health
Emma Rooney
Senior Program Assistant
Board on Global Health
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
NOVEMBER 15
2:00 p.m. Welcome from the Co-Chairs
• Donna Ferguson, Mental health and wellness program
manager, Department of the Army Criminal Investigations
Command, Department of Defense
• Andrea Pfeifle, Associate vice president for
Interprofessional Practice and Education, The Ohio State
University and Wexner Medical Center
2:05 p.m. Framing the Conversation
Relevance of Implementation Science in Health Professions
Education
Agnes Binagwaho, Vice chancellor and co-founder of the
University of Global Health Equity, Partners in Health,
Rwanda
Learner Reluctance in Working with Older Adult Populations
Cathy A. Maxwell, Vanderbilt University School of Nursing
C
Workshop Agenda
81
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
82 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
2:30 p.m. Working with an Older Population: Implementation Science
for Studying Learner Attitudes
Moderator: Aliki Thomas, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, McGill University
Speaker: Natalie F. Douglas, Communication Sciences and
Disorders, Central Michigan University
Dr. Douglas presents her study: Service-Learning with Older
Adults in Care Communities: Measures of Attitude Shifts in
Undergraduate Students
Roundtable Discussion: There are multiple potential
frameworks that could be used for applying implementation
science to implement the study Service-Learning with Older
Adults in Care Communities: Measures of Attitude Shifts in
Undergraduate Students in different settings with different
populations. The roundtable will explore two general
questions that could apply to any of the frameworks.
Moderator: Aliki Thomas, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, McGill University
Roundtable Discussants:
• Toby Brooks, Athletic Training Program, Texas Tech
University Health Science
• Kim Dunleavy, Department of Physical Therapy,
University of Florida; ACAPT Forum Rep.
• Hannah K. Wilson, Department of Nutrition, Dietetics, and
Exercise Science, Concordia College
• Ewan Williams, Medical University of South Carolina
3:55 p.m. Closing
4:00 p.m. Adjourn
DECEMBER 7
3:00 p.m. Welcome from the Co-Chairs
• Donna Ferguson, Mental health and wellness program
manager, Department of the Army Criminal Investigations
Command, Department of Defense
• Andrea Pfeifle, Associate vice president for
interprofessional practice and education, Ohio State
University and Wexner Medical Center
A conversation with Willie Ann Burroughs and Nancy Cruz
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX C 83
3:20 p.m. Educating Learners on Aging Across the Life Course
What Matters Most
Caitrin Lynch, Dean of faculty and professor of anthropology
at Olin College of Engineering
Joined by Peg Wihtol, community member, and Ian Eykamp
and Zoie Leo, electrical and computer engineering majors,
Olin College of Engineering
Q&A
4:00 p.m. Working with Older Adults: Treatment/Care, Prevention, and
Health Promotion
Objective: To understand the importance of a person’s social,
community, and cultural developmental factors impacting
their health in later years requiring treatment/care while
promoting health and prevention
Moderator: Cathy Maxwell
Opening speaker: Ricardo Custodio, University of Hawaii
West O’ahu, Kalihi-Palama Health Center
Roundtable Discussion: WHO’s Intrinsic Capacity (p. 65)
“The new vision of the World Health Organization for
ageing was articulated in 2015 in the World report on ageing
and health (2). This moved the organization from thinking
about health in older age as the presence or absence of
disease, and encouraged us instead to look more at an older
person’s functional ability (FA). It also strongly endorsed the
need for countries not only to cater more effectively for the
needs of older people but also to provide their health services
and care in a more integrated way.”
See WHO, 2017: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/
WHO-FWC-ALC-17.2
The IC framework comprises cognition, mobility,
psychological, vitality, and sensory functions. We added
social, family, community, cultural, and spiritual factors.
Is WHO’s intrinsic capacity framework the right model?
Interprofessional Discussants:
• Elizabeth (Liza) Goldblatt, The Academy of Integrative
Health
• Kathryn M. Kolasa, East Carolina University, Brody
School of Medicine
• Senthil Rajasekaranm, Khalifa University College of
Medicine and Health Sciences
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
84 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Reflections from a Learner:
• Brooke Hazen, DNP student in adult geriatrics, Vanderbilt
University
Respondents:
• Zohray Talib, California University of Science and
Medicine
• Catherine Grus, American Psychological Association
• Nancy Kusmaul, University of Maryland School of Social
Work
5:15 p.m. Closing/Adjourn
DECEMBER 8
9:00 a.m. Welcome Back from the Co-Chairs
• Donna Ferguson, Mental health and wellness program
manager, Department of the Army Criminal Investigations
Command, Department of Defense
• Andrea Pfeifle, Associate vice president for
interprofessional practice and education, Ohio State
University and Wexner Medical Center
9:05 a.m.
9:20 a.m. Supply and Demand
Is the Health Workforce Prepared to Meet the Needs of an
Aging Population?
Objective: To explore the demographics of an aging
population and the makeup of the health workforce in
education and practice and to consider how ageism and other
push and pull factors draw people toward or away from
working with older adult populations
Moderator: Greg Hartley, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine
Speaker: Rebecca George, M.D. Candidate, University of
California Davis
Roundtable Discussion on Ageism: Push and Pull Factors
Facilitator: Greg Hartley, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX C 85
Roundtable Discussants:
• Lauren Mazzurco, Eastern Virginia Medical School
• Ryan Bradley, Helfgott Research Institute, National
University of Natural Medicine
• Rajean P. Moone, Center for Healthy Aging and
Innovation, University of Minnesota
• Jeannine Lawrence, Department of Human Nutrition,
University of Alabama
• Barbara Resnick, School of Nursing, University of
Maryland
10:15 a.m. Break
10:30 a.m. Problem-Gap
How Do You Build an Interprofessional Program for
Addressing the Needs of Older Adults?
Objective: To learn about programs educating learners
interprofessionally on how to address the unique needs of
older adults
Moderators: Andrea Pfeifle and Donna Ferguson, Co-Chair
Forum members and the first 50 non-member virtual
participants will be automatically sent into breakout groups.
Each group will engage in two discussions at 30 minutes per
session. All others will remain in the main room.
Main Room:
Two Presentations:
• Integrating the 4 Ms: Age-Friendly Health Systems
Framework in CVS MinuteClinics: Accessing Age-Friendly
Health Education Tool
• Co-presenters: Mary Dolansky, School of Nursing, Case
Western Reserve University, and Ann Pohnert, lead
director of clinical quality, CVS MinuteClinic
• Transforming Attitudes about Memory Loss: With
Learners, Care Providers, and Communities
• Co-presenters: Teresa McCarthy, Department of
Family Medicine and Community Health, University
of Minnesota, and Teresa M. Schicker, Minnesota
Northstar GWEP, University of Minnesota
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
86 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Breakout Groups:
1. Learners’ Perspectives
Led by Brooke Hazen, DNP student in adult geriatrics,
Vanderbilt University, and facilitated by Nicole Anselme,
student liaison to planning committee; Lily Brickman,
student in food science and human nutrition, University
of Maine; Rebecca George, M.D. candidate, University of
California Davis
2. Engaging Intergenerational Learners Through Age-Friendly
Universities
Led by Brooke Hazen, DNP student in adult geriatrics,
ed and facilitated by Rajean Moone, Center for Healthy
Aging and Innovation, School of Public Health, University
of Minnesota
3. Continuing Professional Development in Interdisciplinary
Primary Care Settings
Led by Josea Kramer, Geriatric Research, Education and
Clinical Center, and facilitated by Jennifer Kim, Vanderbilt
University School of Nursing
4. The Virtual Interprofessional (VIP) Consultation Clinic
Led by Kristen Roof, University of North Florida,
and facilitated by Kathryn M. Kolasa, East Carolina
University, Brody School of Medicine
11:30 a.m. Closing
12:00 p.m. Adjourn
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Donna Ferguson, Ph.D., M.A. (Co-Chair), possesses more than 22 years
of broad, comprehensive experience bridging federal government service,
academia, and the private sector. She is currently serving as the Department
of the Army Criminal Investigations Command Mental Health and Wellness
Program manager. Dr. Ferguson has served in other career-enhancing
positions, including chief of the Behavioral Sciences Education and Training
Division,
chief of the Behavioral Analysis and Research Branch, licensed mental
health professional, clinical supervisor, and adjunct professor at Webster
University and Drury University within their leadership, education, and counseling
programs. She is the Department of Defense (DOD) 2021 recipient of
the Spirit of Hope Award, which is given to an individual or organization
who epitomizes the values such as duty, honor, courage, loyalty, commitment,
integrity, and selfless dedication and who significantly enhances the quality of
life of military service members and their families serving around the world.
Her portfolio includes trauma/transgenerational trauma, intimate partner
violence, suicide prevention, sexual assault, grief and loss, diversity, equity,
and inclusion, and curriculum development. As a specialist in her field, she
has been a keynote speaker, lecturer, and trainer to the U.S. Congress, DOD
military commands, colleges and universities, mental health organizations,
law enforcement agencies, and civic organizations. She is best known for her
psychoeducational work titled A Tree called Trauma, teaching mental health
professionals and clients how to understand trauma in order to correct its
impacts. Dr. Ferguson currently holds a Ph.D. in counselor education and
supervision; an M.A. in mental health counseling, human resource management,
and human resource development; and a B.S. in psychology.
D
Planning Committee and
Speaker Biographies
87
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
88 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Andrea Pfeifle, Ed.D., PT, FNAP (Co-Chair), is the associate vice president
for interprofessional practice and education (IPE) at Ohio State University.
Dr. Pfeifle works with each health science college to further develop and
implement a new curriculum for IPE, and creates new educational models
of practice across the Wexner Medical Center to create a learning environment
that best prepares students for the future of team-based care. Dr.
Pfeifle comes from the Indiana University Interprofessional Practice and
Education Center, where she served as its executive director for the past
6 years. She has an impressive and extensive career in education, having
worked to advance interprofessional education and teaching collaborative
practice models across medical and health science education programs for
more than 25 years. In addition to directing the Interprofessional Practice
and Education Center, Dr. Pfeifle was associate dean of interprofessional
health education and practice and associate professor of family medicine at
Indiana University School of Medicine and adjunct associate professor of
physical therapy at Indiana University–Purdue University School of Health
and Human Sciences. As associate vice chancellor for IPE at Ohio State,
Dr. Pfeifle works with each health science college to further develop and
implement a new curriculum for IPE and creates new educational models
of practice across the Wexner Medical Center to create a learning environment
that best prepares students for the future of team-based care. Prior
to joining Indiana University, she worked at the University of Kentucky
from 1998 to 2014 in various roles, including as instructor in the colleges
of health professions and of medicine, as the director of education in the
Department of Family and Community Medicine, as chair of the Interprofessional
Education Working Group, and as inaugural director of the
Center for Interprofessional Education, Research, and Practice. Dr. Pfeifle
earned her doctor of instruction and administration, her master of science
in instructional systems design, and a bachelor’s degree in physical therapy
from the University of Kentucky. She completed a postgraduate fellowship
in media design and production from the University of Kentucky.
Riham Ahmed Abu Affan is a third-year medical student at Khalifa University
in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Nicole Anselme, M.B.A., M.S.N., is a board-certified critical care registered
nurse with 6 years of nursing experience in various specialties such as emergency,
critical care, post-anesthesia, medicine/surgery, and school nursing.
She completed a master of science in nursing in 2020 and is currently working
towards completing an M.B.A. in health care administration. She possesses
a strong passion for nurse innovation, design thinking, and strategy
development to mitigate social determinants of health and improve population
health in underserved communities. Her passion has been fostered
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 89
through participation in hackathons and brainstorming events as well as by
working towards developing an app to improve health literacy and patient
outcomes. Her professional interests include research and scholarly writing,
discussing topics currently affecting the nursing profession, and exploring
opportunities to support changes in nursing practice and education. She enjoys
mentoring students and newly licensed nurses and is a fierce advocate
against nurse incivility and bullying.
Ryan Bradley, N.D., M.P.H., is a senior investigator and the director of
research
at the National University of Natural Medicine in Portland,
Oregon,
and an associate professor in the Herbert Wertheim School of
Public Health and Human Longevity Science at the University of California
San Diego in La Jolla. Dr. Bradley received his N.D. from Bastyr University
in 2003 and his master of public health in epidemiology at the University of
Washington in 2009. After completing a residency, Dr. Bradley completed
8 years of National Institutes of Health (NIH)–funded clinical research
training, including 5 years in the Division of Cardiology at the University
of Washington. He is the principal investigator or program director on three
active NIH grants. In addition to his research and teaching activities, Dr.
Bradley regularly presents on the intersection between public health and
complementary and integrative health (CIH). In 2022 he was appointed as
the licensed CIH representative to the board of governors of the Patient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
Lily Brickman, M.S., holds a master’s degree in food science and human
nutrition
from the University of Maine, where she also completed her
dietetic
internship. She was awarded the 2021 Outstanding Dietetics
Student
award for the state of Maine in 2021. Her undergraduate honors
thesis research, Identifying Cofactors Contributing to Food Insecurity in
Elderly Maine Residents Living at Home, was selected for the Emerging
Leaders in Nutrition Science Abstract Recognition Award Program from
the American Society for Nutrition in 2022. Last week she successfully
defended her master’s thesis research, which also focused on geriatric nutrition
and was titled Educating Dietetic Students on the Nutritional Concerns
of Older Adults.
Toby Brooks, LAT, ATC, Ph.D., is a dreamer, a learner, and a doer. He
currently serves as assistant dean for faculty development in the Texas
Tech University Health Sciences Center (TTUHSC) School of Health Professions
and as an associate professor and director of the master of athletic
training program at TTUHSC in Lubbock. His masters and doctoral work
in teaching and teacher education at the University of Arizona paved the
way for a career as an educator, with two decades of experience in the
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
90 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
classroom teaching athletic training, strength and conditioning, and general
kinesiology
coursework. He is a six-time recipient of the SGA Outstanding
Faculty Award for the MAT Program and also received the Dean’s Award
for Excellence in Teaching in 2017.
Ricardo Custodio, M.D., M.P.H., is a farmer, pediatrician, and professor.
He was born on Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands. Throughout his 40-year
career he has provided health care to Hawaii’s poor and vulnerable population
living in Kalihi, Hilo, Pahoa, Kau, Waianae, Nanakuli, Kapolei, and
Waipahu. He has overseen the design and build of multiple clinics and the
implementation of many programs. This includes helping to start a health
plan, a vaccine program, a medical school, a nurse practitioner residency, a
health science division, and now a nursing program, all of them in underserved
communities.
Mary Dolansky, Ph.D., RN, FAAN, is an associate professor at the Frances
Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve University (CWRU),
and senior fellow in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Quality
Scholars
program at the Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center. Dr.
Dolansky is the director of the QSEN (Quality and Safety Education for
Nurses) Institute. She has co-published two books on quality improvement
education, co-authored several book chapters and articles, and was guest
editor on a special quality improvement education issue in the journal
Quality Management in Health Care. She has taught the interdisciplinary
course Continual Improvement in Health Care at CWRU for the past
10 years and was chair of the quality and safety task force at the school
of nursing that integrated quality and safety into the undergraduate and
graduate nursing curriculum. She is co-director of the VA Transforming
Primary Care Center of Excellence, which was instituted to implement and
evaluate a longitudinal interdisciplinary curriculum for medical residents
and nurse practitioner learners, and she is active on the CWRU Josiah
Macy Jr. Foundation grant to implement interprofessional education for
pre-licensure students in the health care professions.
Natalie F. Douglas, Ph.D., CCC-SLP, is a professor in the Department of
Communication Sciences and Disorders at Central Michigan University.
She has spent the last 20 years supporting people living with dementia,
aphasia, and other communication disorders through clinical practice, quality
improvement projects, teaching, and research. As a speech-language
pathologist, she specializes in improving the ability to communicate one’s
feelings, preferences, and needs so as to support relationships. To this end,
she is currently engaging in work related to pragmatic clinical trials and
learning health systems.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 91
Kim Dunleavy, Ph.D, MOMT, PT, OCS, FNAP, represents the American
Council of Academic Physical Therapy on the National Academies of Science,
Engineering and Medicine Global Forum on Innovation in Health
Professions Education. She has extensive academic experience in physical
therapy education at the University of Central Arkansas, Wayne State
University, and the University of Florida. She is a clinical professor and the
director of community engagement in the Department of Physical Therapy
at the University of Florida. Dr. Dunleavy’s training includes an entrylevel
professional physiotherapy bachelor’s degree from the University of
Cape Town, a masters in physical therapy from the University of Central
Arkansas,
and a Ph.D. in instructional technology from Wayne State University.
She has been board certified by the American Physical Therapy
Association as an orthopedic specialist since 1993 and was elected as a
distinguished scholar and fellow of the National Academies of Practice
Physical Therapy Academy in 2017. She served on the planning committee
for the global forum workshop on the non-pharmacological management
of pain in December 2018 and is on the planning committee for the 2022
workshop on exploring the use and application for implementation science
in health professions education. She is one of two co-editors for a collaborative
special edition on Exemplars and Models for Interprofessional Pain
Education, a collaborative project initiated by global forum members and
the International Society for the Study of Pain Education group.
Ian Eykamp is an electrical and computer engineering major at the Olin
College of Engineering, and he is interested in potential careers in design
and education. To him, design is the process of identifying the diverse
stakeholders for a project and involving them directly in decision making to
ensure that the project meets their stated and non-stated needs. He believes
engineers should act not just as problem solvers but also as advocates for
the people their work will serve.
Rebecca George is a fourth-year M.D. candidate and rural community
health scholar from the University of California Davis School of Medicine.
She has a 15-year background in consulting at the intersection of government,
health care, and community. Her work addressed intersectional
determinants of health in Medicare and Medicaid programming with
organizations
such as IBM Watson Health and the California Department
of Health Care Services. For 8 years, she volunteered as an in-home care
provider for people with life-limiting illness. Her longitudinal research on
the correlation of county-level demographic diversity and increased access
to palliative care resources will be presented at the annual assembly of the
American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine in March 2023.
She is pursuing an M.D. to improve quality of life and health outcomes
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
92 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
across the lifespan for people from systemically underserved communities,
especially rural populations. As an aspiring family medicine and palliative
care physician, she seeks to use education to empower people in shaping
the story of their lives all the way up to the end.
Elizabeth (Liza) Goldblatt, Ph.D., M.P.A./H.A., is a founding board member
of the Academic Collaborative for Integrative Health and Medicine
(ACIH). She was the acting executive director for 3 years, the chair of the
organization for 8 years, and vice-chair for 3 years. Dr. Goldblatt represents
ACIH at the Global Forum on Innovations for Health Professional Education.
She has been the official ACIH representative to the global forum for
12 years. She is the co-facilitator representing ACIH on the development of
a national course that will support the advancement of interprofessional,
collaborative, team based, patient-centered care in partnership with the
Academic Consortium for Integrative Medicine and Health, the national
organization that represents integrative medicine physicians, nurses and
allied
health professionals. She was a consultant on a recent Albert Einstein
College of Medicine’s Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute grant
to study group acupuncture approaches for chronic pain. She was on the
leadership team of the National Center for Integrative Primary Health
leadership team, housed at the University of Arizona, that developed a
collaborative on-line course in integrative health for primary health care
professionals. She was on the initial curriculum development team of the
Duke Leadership Program in Integrative Health. In addition, she developed
the doctoral and master’s degrees at the Oregon College of Oriental Medicine
in Portland, where she was president for 15 years, has chaired multiple
acupuncture/Oriental medicine accreditation site visits, co-founded two
doctorate of acupuncture and Oriental medicine (DAOM) programs, and
was a member of the American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine
(ACTCM) doctoral faculty.
Dr. Goldblatt is a leading educator in integrative health and medicine.
She has a master’s degree in public administration/health administration
(M.P.A./H.A.) from Portland State University in Oregon and earned her
Ph.D. from the University of California Los Angeles.
She is currently an educational consultant focusing on interprofessional
education and collaborative practice. From 2014 to 2017, she was the
interim
executive director for ACIH. She served as provost and vice president
of academic affairs at the ACTCM from 2004 to 2014. From 1987
to 2003 Dr. Goldblatt was president of the Oregon College of Oriental
Medicine (OCOM) in Portland. She served as president of the Council of
Colleges of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine (CCAOM), a national
organization that represents over 50 colleges throughout the United States,
from 1996 to 2002, was the CCAOM vice-president from 1990 to 1996,
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 93
and was on the CCAOM executive committee through 2013. Goldblatt cochaired
the education committee of the North American Acupuncture and
Oriental Medicine Council from 1994 to 2006. She served on the board of
trustees for Pacific University, Forest Grove, Oregon, from 1994 to 2004.
Dr. Goldblatt has co-authored several articles and contributed to book
chapters with a focus on integrative health, including the recently revised
third edition of the Clinicians and Educators Desk Reference on complementary
and integrative health and a recent National Academy of Medicine
publication on organizational health and clinician well-being. She has presented
at numerous national and international conferences on integrative
health and medicine and served on several committees and nonprofit boards
that promote access to health care, body/mind practices, and education.
She is currently on the Academic Collaborative for Integrative Medicine
board and on the Coastal Health Alliance board of directors at Point Reyes
Station,
California, and she is the treasurer of the Tibetan Nuns Project
Board, an international organization that focuses on education and medical
care for the Tibetan nun refugees in Northern India. In 2018, for the first
time in history, she received the Geshe-ma degree from His Holiness the
Dalai Lama; this degree is the equivalent of a Ph.D. in divinity.
Catherine L. Grus, Ph.D., is the chief education officer at the American
Psychological Association (APA) and has been on the staff of the APA since
2005. She was named deputy executive director for education in 2010.
In her role as chief education officer, she leads the association’s efforts to
promote psychology in education and education in psychology. Dr. Grus
has played a lead role in the association’s efforts related to advancing interprofessional
education for psychology students, primary care psychology
practice, the development of models and tools for competency assessment,
and supervision. She serves as APA’s representative to the National Academy
of Medicine’s Global Forum on Innovations in Health Professions
Education, the Interprofessional Professionalism Collaborative, and the
Federation of Associations of Schools of the Health Professions. Before
coming to APA, Dr. Grus was an assistant professor in the department of
pediatrics at the University of Miami School of Medicine, where she served
as the director of an APA-accredited internship program. Dr. Grus is the
recipient of many awards, including the Paul Nelson Award, the Friend of
the Association of Directors of Psychology Training Clinics, and the Nova
University Distinguished Alumni Achievement award. In 2016 she was inducted
into the National Academies of Practice as a distinguished scholar
and fellow.
Greg Hartley, PT, D.P.T., FNAP, FAPTA, is an associate professor of clinical
physical therapy and medical education at the University of Miami Miller
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
94 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
School of Medicine and is currently the vice president (and immediate pastpresident)
of the Academy of Geriatric Physical Therapy, a component of
the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA). Dr. Hartley is a fellow
of the American Physical Therapy Association and the National Academies
of Practice. Dr. Hartley received a doctorate in physical therapy (D.P.T.)
from the University of Miami in 2010, a M.S.P.T. (physical therapy) from the
University of Miami in 1990, and a B.S. (psychology/biology) from the University
of Alabama in 1987. He is co-author of two clinical practice guidelines
for physical therapists, Physical Therapist Management of Patients
with Suspected or Confirmed Osteoporosis (2022) and Management of Falls
in Community-Dwelling Older Adults (2015). Dr. Hartley is the founding
program director of the first APTA-accredited geriatric physical therapy
residency, and he has served as both a board member and the chair of the
American Board of Physical Therapy Residency and Fellowship Education.
Clinically, he has practiced in home health, outpatient, sub-acute rehab,
long-term care, acute care, and rehabilitation hospital settings. He has been
an invited speaker for more than 130 national and regional presentations.
Dr. Hartley’s clinical and research interests are in geriatrics, interprofessional
education/care, clinical reasoning, and physical therapist professional and
post-professional education.
Brooke Hazen, M.S.N., APRN, AGPCNP-BC, is an adult-gerontology primary
care nurse practitioner (AGPCNP) with a master of science in nursing
(M.S.N.) from the Vanderbilt University School of Nursing (VUSN). As she
was working toward her nurse practitioner degree, Ms. Hazen trained with
the Vanderbilt Program for Interprofessional Learning to understand clinical
care from a variety of perspectives. That training continues to deeply
inform her practice and professional interest in geriatrics. Currently, Ms.
Hazen is pursing the doctor of nursing practice (D.N.P.) degree at VUSN.
Her professional practice has centered on health care for veterans of the
U.S. military, who are predominantly members of an aging population. In
addition to her clinical work with geriatrics, she is the president co-chair
of the Middle Tennessee chapter for the Gerontological Advanced Practice
Nurses Association. Throughout her career, Ms. Hazen has worked to
understand the special needs of the aging population. Her goal in engaging
with this workshop is to assist in global planning for a new generation
of interprofessional health care providers who are well-equipped for the
evidence-based care of aging people.
Jennifer L. Kim, D.N.P., is a professor of nursing at Vanderbilt University
School of Nursing (VUSN). She is a certified gerontological nurse practitioner
(GNP) who has coordinated older-adult health courses for VUSN nurse
practitioner students since 2002. She is a graduate of the doctor
of nursing
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 95
practice program at New York University College of Nursing (2015) and of
VUSN’s master of science of nursing (M.S.N.) program (1997). She earned a
bachelor of arts in sociology from the University of California Irvine in 1995.
Dr. Kim works as a GNP in the long-term-care setting. She currently serves
as the president-elect of the Gerontological Advanced Practice Nurses Association,
and she was the founding president of the Gerontological Advanced
Practice Nurses of Middle Tennessee. She is a Hartford Institute Primary
Care for Older Adults Scholar (2012–2014) and Jonas Leadership Scholar
(2012–2014). Dr. Kim was a certification exam writer for the inaugural
APRN gerontological specialist certification exam by the Gerontology
Nursing
Certification Commission. She was an elected member of the National
Hartford Center for Gerontological Nursing Excellence Expert Panel on
Gerontological Nurse Educator Competencies and was recognized by the
organization as a distinguished educator in gerontological nursing in 2018.
Also in 2018, Dr. Kim was inducted as a fellow into the American Association
of Nurse Practitioners. She is currently VUSN’s principal investigator
of the Middle Tennessee Geriatric Workforce Enhancement Program and
recently received funding for a digital literacy program that will be provided
for older adults in an underserved north Nashville community.
Kathryn M. Kolasa, Ph.D., RDN, LDN, is professor emeritus and affiliate
faculty in the Department of Family Medicine and a professor of pediatrics
at the Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University. Dr.
Kolasa earned her Ph.D. in food science from the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville,
in 1974. Her bachelor’s degree is from the Michigan State University
in home economics with communication arts. She served on the
Michigan State University faculty from 1974 to 1983. At East Carolina
University she served as chair of the Human Nutrition and Hospitality Management
Department from 1983 to 1986. She then joined the Department
of Family Medicine and has held a joint appointment in the Department of
Pediatrics from 2003 to 2013. From 2004 to 2020 she served as consultant
to Vidant Health, a nine-hospital system in eastern North Carolina. She was
awarded a Kellogg National Leadership Fellowship in 1986. She has worked
internationally in more than 20 countries. She has served as a consultant
to universities (including accreditation and program reviews), government
and nonprofit agencies, trade associations, and the food and pharmaceutical
industries and as a grant reviewer. She served as an external advisor to the
Children’s Healthy Living program, a childhood obesity prevention program
in the American Pacific (2011–2016).
In 2008 she received the Centennial Award for Excellence—Service
from East Carolina University. She was named a master educator at The
Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University (ECU) and also
received
the ECU Board of Governors Distinguished Professor for Teaching
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
96 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
Award in 2002. In 2003 she began serving as a consultant to the Nutrition
Initiative of the University Health Systems (now ECU Health). In 2004 she
was appointed
to Fit Families NC, a study committee for childhood overweight/
obesity. She provided leadership for the development and implementation
of the Pitt County Achieving Healthy Weight in Children Medical
Nutrition Therapy Protocol, which has been adopted by pediatric practices
throughout the country. Dr. Kolasa directed the Food Literacy Partners
from 1998 to 2008. In 2001–2002 she played a leadership role in the preparation
of the North Carolina Blueprint for Changing Policies and Environments
in Support of Healthy Eating and was a member of the writing team
for the three North Carolina plans to combat obesity. She has been writing
a weekly nutrition column for the Daily Reflector in Greenville, North
Carolina, since 1986. Dr. Kolasa is a licensed dietitian nutritionist (LDN)
and a member of the Society for Nutrition Education, the American Society
for Nutrition, and the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. She serves on
many advisory committees. In retirement she is a volunteer affiliate faculty
at the Brody School of Medicine, where she teaches nutrition to medical
students and residents as well as mentors junior faculty in publication and
presentation. She is a contributing editor for Nutrition Today.
Josea Kramer, Ph.D., is the associate director for education/evaluation of
the geriatric research, education, and clinical center at the Department
of Veterans
Affairs (VA) Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System. She is
the founder and director of the VA Geriatric Scholars Program, which is the
national VA workforce enhancement program that integrates geriatrics
into primary care practices. The Geriatric Scholars Program has provided
tailored continuing professional development opportunities for the interprofessional
primary care workforce since 2008. Components of the program
have also been made available to Indian Health Service and tribal
health programs, as well as a program developed for Indian Health Service
public health nurses on addressing behavioral challenges with dementia. Dr.
Kramer is also known for her earlier health services research on how the
VA and Indian Health Service work together. She is an adjunct professor in
the Division of Geriatric Medicine at the David Geffen School of Medicine
at The University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) and an educator in
the UCLA-VA Geriatric Workforce Enhancement Program, which is funded
by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Health Services
Resource Administration.
Nancy Kusmaul, Ph.D., LMSW, received her M.S.W. from the University
of Michigan and her Ph.D. from the University at Buffalo School of Social
Work. She is an associate professor in the baccalaureate social work program
at the University of Maryland Baltimore County. Dr. Kusmaul worked
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 97
in health care for more than a decade in nursing homes, hospitals, home
care, and adult day care. Her research focuses on organizational culture,
trauma-informed care, and the impact of trauma experiences on the workforce.
She is particularly interested in the experience of direct care workers
in organizations, particularly certified nursing assistants in long-term care
settings. She is a member of the Baltimore County Elder Abuse Coalition
and the Maryland Nursing Home Culture Change Coalition.
Jeannine Lawrence, Ph.D., RDN, is the senior associate dean and a nutrition
professor in the College of Human Environmental Sciences at The University
of Alabama. A registered dietitian, she teaches clinical nutrition and
nutrition research methods to undergraduate and graduate nutrition
students.
Dr. Lawrence’s research focuses on nutrition assessment and interventions
with nutritionally at-risk populations, particularly older adults,
and using interprofessional education to improve health care outcomes in
these populations.
Zoie Leo is an undergraduate student at Olin College of Engineering, where
she is studying mechanical engineering. She has a humanities concentration
in studio art. She is from Worcester, Massachusetts.
Caitrin Lynch, M.A., Ph.D., has professional experience that includes
an assistant
professorship in anthropology at Drew University as well as
several fellowships, including a Mellon Postdoctoral Fellowship at Johns
Hopkins University. She has taught at the University of Chicago and the
University of Illinois at Chicago and is currently a visiting research associate
in the Department of Anthropology at Brandeis University. At the Olin
College
of Engineering she teaches in the arts, humanities, and social sciences
program. She is the secretary of the American Ethnological Society
(of the American Anthropological Association) and past treasurer of the
American Institute of Sri Lankan Studies. She is the author of two books,
Retirement on the Line: Age, Work, and Value in An American Factory and
Juki Girls, Good Girls: Gender and Cultural Politics in Sri Lanka’s Global
Garment Industry. She is also producer of the documentary film My Name
is Julius. Dr. Lynch received her Ph.D. and M.A. in cultural anthropology
from the University of Chicago and her B.A. in anthropology from Bates
College. Dr. Lynch’s research and teaching passions include examining the
dynamics
of work and cultural values (with a focus on aging and gender)
as well as the cultural dimensions of offshore manufacturing plus a commitment
to understanding social behavior in global contexts and a devotion
to encouraging students to use qualitative methods to think critically
about the world around them. She especially strives to expose engineering
students to critical analysis and identification of the needs and opportunities
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
98 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
in our aging world. One outlet for these efforts is in her interdisciplinary
service-learning course Engineering For Humanity: Helping Elders Age in
Place through Partnerships for Healthy Living.
Cathy A. Maxwell, Ph.D., RN, FAAN, carries out research directed at
understanding outcome trajectories of older adults related to functional
decline and frailty. She received her B.S.N. and M.S.N. from Troy University
and her Ph.D. from Vanderbilt University in 2012. After completing a
2-year postdoctoral fellowship, she assumed a faculty position at Vanderbilt
University School of Nursing in 2014. Dr. Maxwell’s research has centered
around the concept of frailty. She has examined outcomes in relationship
to older adults’ frailty status and reported 1-year outcomes of older adults
hospitalized for an injury (falls), including functional decline, re-admissions
to acute care, and mortality. Dr. Maxwell is interested in empowering
older adults to manage their personal trajectories of aging. She developed
a frailty-focused communication aid and associated workshop to train
health care professionals who work with older adults to engage in focused
dialogue about proactive aging. Most recently, Dr. Maxwell developed an
educational tool for older adults to facilitate their understanding of the
concept of frailty and to encourage proactive management of their personal
trajectories of aging. She is interested in interventions with a nursing focus
that empower older adults to engage in behaviors that enhance well-being
and improve quality of life. She has recently received faculty seed funding
to develop a video series on “mitochondrial fitness” aimed at promoting
lifestyle change in the second half of life to mitigate the development of
chronic conditions (i.e., neurodegeneration) and eventual frailty.
Lauren Mazzurco, D.O., has been part of the Eastern Virginia Medical
School (EVMS) community and faculty, serving as an assistant professor
of medicine, since January 2015. Prior to joining EVMS, she completed an
osteopathic internal medicine residency at Botsford Hospital in Farmington
Hills, Michigan, and completed a 1-year clinical fellowship in geriatric
medicine at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. This was followed by a
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) special fellowship in geriatric medicine
at the VA Ann Arbor Health System. She then went on to complete a fellowship
in hospice and palliative medicine also at the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor. Dr. Mazzurco practices in diverse settings, including an inpatient
palliative care consult service and a skilled nursing facility where
she supervises third- and fourth-year clerkship students, internal medicine
and family medicine residents, and geriatric medicine fellows. Most recently
she has transitioned into the position of associate program director for the
geriatric medicine fellowship at EVMS. Dr. Mazzurco is the director for
case-based learning at EVMS and has served as the co-principal investigator
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 99
on the American Medical Association Accelerating Change in Medical
Education Grant, which supports the integration of health system science,
chronic disease prevention and management, and high-value care into the
undergraduate medical curriculum.
Teresa McCarthy, M.D., M.S., is a geriatrician and associate professor of
medicine in the department of family medicine at the University of Minnesota.
She is a member of the Interprofessional Geriatrics Coordinating Council for
the University of Minnesota Northstar Geriatric Work Force Enhancement
Program. She teaches medical, dental, nursing, pharmacy, and therapy students
and created an interprofessional education team to practice and learn
within a teaching nursing home site. Her research interests include delirium,
falls, and medical direction in long-term care. She is a member of the American
Board of Post-Acute and Long-term Care Medicine.
Rajean Moone, Ph.D., is the faculty director for long-term care administration
in the College of Continuing and Professional Studies at the University
of Minnesota. He serves as the associate director of education for the
Center
for Healthy Aging and Innovation in the School of Public Health.
Dr. Moone’s experience includes working at the Minnesota state unit on
aging and area agencies on aging and leading Training to Serve and the
Minnesota Leadership Council on Aging. He is a member of the Governor’s
Council on an Age-Friendly Minnesota, the Minnesota Association of
Geriatrics Inspired Clinicians Board, and the FamilyMeans Board. He is a
fellow of the Gerontological Society of America, a lifetime member of the
Minnesota Gerontological Society, a McNair Scholar, and a Congressional/
Health and Aging Policy Fellow. Dr. Moone holds a Minnesota nursing
home administrator’s license.
Anne Pohnert, M.S.N., RN, FNP-BC, is the lead director of clinical quality
at CVS MinuteClinic and lead director of clinical quality for a national
convenient care group practice of 1,200 clinics with approximately 3,000
nurse practitioners and physician assistants in 35 states and the District
of Columbia. Her responsibilities include leadership of the clinical quality
program at MinuteClinic, including strategic planning and execution of the
Joint Commission Survey process and preparation in all MinuteClinic locations;
leadership of the National MinuteClinic Quality and Patient Safety
Committee; facilitation of multiple national quality initiatives; oversight
of clinical quality metric development, implementation, and communication;
annual review and update of all clinical and infection control policies
and procedures; sponsorship of national shared governance councils for
clinical quality; leadership of the steering committee and quality review
team for the MinuteClinic customer relationship management program;
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
100 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
and facilitation of the clinical practice support committee, with a focus on
clinical quality improvement in all practice areas.
Senthil Rajasekaranm, M.D., MMHPE, is the chief academic officer and associate
dean for academic affairs at the Khalifa University College of Medicine
and Health Sciences in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. He received
his M.D. from Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry and his
postgraduate medical pharmacology (M.D.) from Sri Ramachandra Medical
University in Chennai, India. His work experience spans countries that
include India, Ireland, Cayman Islands, and the United States. He was on
the staff as a faculty member at the National University of Ireland Galway
in Ireland and served in Decanal roles at St. Matthew’s University School
of Medicine in Grand Cayman; Wayne State University School of Medicine
in Detroit, Michigan; and Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk,
Virginia. In his prior roles he was instrumental in establishing Centers for
Excellence in Medical Education and served as its founding director.
Dr. Rajasekaran has been recognized by honorary fellowships from the
American College of Clinical Pharmacology and the Academy of Medical
Educators in the United Kingdom. He has received multiple institutional
and national awards for teaching excellence and is a winner of the 2017
Costs of Care and American Board of Internal Medicine Foundation Teaching
Value Challenge. He has received multiple educational grants aimed at
implementing educational innovations. His grant from the American Medical
Association produced a handbook titled Facilitating Medical Education
Transitions. Along the Medical Education Continuum. Dr. Rajasekaran
was part of the 10-member working group convened by the World Health
Organization that led to the most recent publication of the Global Competency
Framework.
Dr. Rajasekaran has been involved in the LCME accreditation as a site
team member, and in his medical school leadership roles he has led their
respective accreditation efforts. His areas of medical education research
include accreditation, evaluating educational innovations in the areas, and
teaching and assessment. He serves as the deputy editor of the Teaching
and Learning in Medicine journal and is active on multiple international
medical education societies and organizations.
Barbara Resnick, Ph.D., CRNP, is a professor in the Department of Organizational
Systems and Adult Health at the University of Maryland School
of Nursing, co-directs the Adult/Gerontological Nurse Practitioner Program
and the Biology and Behavior Across the Lifespan Research Center of Excellence,
holds the Sonya Ziporkin Gershowitz Chair in Gerontology, and
does clinical work at Roland Park Place. Her research program is focused
on optimizing function and physical activity among older adults, facilitating
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 101
healthy behaviors among older adults across all settings of care, exploring
the effects of resilience and genetics on function and physical activity, and
testing the dissemination and implementation of interventions in real-world
settings. This work has been supported by the National Institutes of Health,
the Agency for Health Care Quality, and foundations such as the Helen and
Leonard Stulman Foundation and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Dr. Resnick has over 200 published articles, numerous chapters in nursing
and medical textbooks, and books on restorative care and resilience
in older adults. She has held leadership positions in multiple organizations
including the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, the Gerontological
Advanced Practice Nurses Association, the Society of Behavioral Medicine,
the Omnicare Pharmacy and Therapeutics Advisory Board, the Gerontological
Society of American, and the American Geriatrics Society. Currently she
holds leadership positions on the following boards: Gerontological Advanced
Practice Nurses Foundation, American Medical Directors Association Foundation,
National Hartford Center for Gerontological Nursing Excellence,
and Omnicare Pharmacy and Therapeutics Advisory Board. She is also the
vice president elect of the Gerontological Society of America.
As both a clinician and academician, Dr. Resnick has received a number
of honors, the most recent of which include a 2014 honorary doctor of
science from State University of New York (SUNY) on behalf of the SUNY
board of trustees; the 2015 Dennis W. Jahnigen Memorial Award from the
American Geriatrics Society; a 2015 induction into the Sigma Theta Tau
International Nurse Researcher Hall of Fame; and the 2015 University of
Maryland Regents Award for Mentoring. In addition to her own publications,
Dr. Resnick is actively engaged in helping others disseminate their
research and clinical work. She has been the editor of the journal Geriatric
Nursing since 2006, is the associate editor for the Journal of Aging and
Physical Activity, Translational Behavioral Medicine, and the Journal of
the American Medical Directors Association. She has presented on clinical
as well as research related topics nationally and internationally.
Dr. Resnick has an extensive history working across disciplines in
teaching, research, and practice settings. This translates into policy initiatives,
and she works among interdisciplinary groups at the policy level.
She was a member of the Assisted Living Workgroup; currently represents
the American Geriatrics Society on the Eldercare Workforce Alliance; and
has worked on focused initiatives relevant to care of older adults with
the American Geriatrics Society, the American Medical Directors Association,
the Gerontological
Society of America, and the Society of Behavioral
Medicine.
She is well recognized for her expertise in multiple areas and has
served on numerous technical expert panels addressing quality measures
across all settings of care as well as those specific to nursing homes and programs
such as the PACE program. Examples of involvement include serving
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
102 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
on the technical expert panels for the development of measures that will be
aligned with the IMPACT Act of 2014; revising the late-life loss in function
quality indicators for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services
(served as chair); and developing the catheter-associated urinary tract infections
prevention tool. She has worked with the Centers for Medicare
&
Medicaid
Services on numerous initiatives related to the Minimum Data
Set development and implementation and on the implementation of quality
initiatives such as decreasing antipsychotic use in nursing homes and other
settings of care.
Kristen Roof, Ph.D., is a registered dietitian and an associate professor
in the Department of Nutrition and Dietetics at the University of North
Florida. Her major research interests focus on program development and
evaluation using virtual technology. One program is focused on interprofessional
education and communication among the health care team.
The second program is focused on virtual project-based mentoring in
dietetics.
(See: www.rdmentor.com.) She is an expert at using innovative
technologies in the classroom and in practice. Dr. Hicks-Roof is an active
researcher, having presented her research at over 50 invited and professional
presentations and having over 50 published articles and media. Using
cutting-edge technologies, she has worked on several projects to understand
whole-grain knowledge and sensory perceptions.
Teresa Schicker, M.P.A., is the program manager of the Minnesota Northstar
Geriatric Workforce Enhancement Program at the University of Minnesota.
In previous roles she led a national network to conduct research in interprofessional
education and collaborative practice in health care and was
the administrative leader of the Minnesota training center for the national
implementation of TeamSTEPPS. Ms. Schicker earned a master’s degree in
public affairs from the University of Minnesota Humphrey School focusing
on public administration and health. Additionally, she obtained a graduate
minor from the Center for Spirituality and Healing. Her professional
interests include health equity, interprofessionalism, and integrative healing
therapies.
Joanne G. Schwartzberg, M.D., is a scholar-in-residence at the Accreditation
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), researching the
experiences and well-being of physician residents throughout their training.
Prior to joining the ACGME, Dr. Schwartzberg served as director of aging
and community health with the American Medical Association, where he
developed multiple national programs to educate practicing physicians,
residents, and medical students in implementing the latest concepts and
guidelines into everyday medical management. These programs reached
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 103
from 10,000 to more than 30,000 physicians on such topics as post-acute
care and care transitions, home and community-based care, health literacy,
patient safety, medication reconciliation, disability access, and older driver
safety, with up to 75 percent of attendees implementing practice changes as
a result (as reported 3–6 months after training). Dr. Schwartzberg has also
served as an expert advisor on many panels and committees for governmental
agencies (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Assistant Secretary
for Planning and Evaluation, Health Resources and Services Adminstration,
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration) and private organizations (United States Pharmacopeia,
ACGME, Association of American Medical Colleges, Institute of Medicine
[now the National Academy of Medicine], National Committee for Quality
Assurance, and the Joint Commission).
Zohray Talib, M.D., is the senior associate dean of academic affairs, chair
of the Department of Medical Education, and a professor of medical education
and medicine at the California University of Science and Medicine.
Her experience spans the field of medical education and global health, with
a particular focus on social accountability in health professions education.
Dr. Talib is currently serving as the co-chair for the National Academy of
Medicine’s Global Forum on Innovations in Health Professional Education.
Dr. Talib has worked with medical education programs in the United
States and across sub-Saharan Africa to bring best practices, especially into
low-resource settings. Her particular areas of interest include communitybased
education and building a robust and diverse faculty workforce for
institutions in underserved communities. Dr. Talib’s research across 10
countries in Africa sheds light on the value of bringing learners into community-
based health care settings. Her research also examines the burden
of mental health and strategies to integrate mental health into primary care.
She has visiting faculty appointments at Mbarara University in Uganda,
Aga Khan University in Kenya, and the University of Global Health Equity
in Rwanda.
Dr. Talib brings to the field of academic medicine and global health
the perspective of being a primary care clinician, educator, and researcher.
She is a licensed and practicing internal medicine primary care physician.
She teaches clinical medicine, health policy, and health systems to medical
students. Dr. Talib was previously at the George Washington University,
where she was associate program director for the internal medicine program
and a researcher with the Health Workforce Institute.
Dr. Talib has a deep commitment to caring for underserved communities.
Dr. Talib has worked in Central Asia and East Africa on community-based
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
104 ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF AN AGING POPULATION THROUGH HPE
cancer screening, management training, and clinical research training for
academic faculty. She currently chairs a national board that provides social
safety net services including a crisis line, mental health services, and
community-based care for the elderly.
Dr. Talib received her bachelor of science in physical therapy from
McGill
University in Montreal and her M.D. from the University of Alberta
in Edmonton, Canada. She completed her residency in internal medicine
at the George Washington University Hospital. She is board-certified by
the American Board of Internal Medicine and is a fellow of the American
College of Physicians.
Aliki Thomas, Ph.D., OT (c), erg., is an assistant professor and research
scientist at the Center for Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine, McGill
University. Dr. Thomas’s research is on education and knowledge translation.
She is interested in the development and assessment of advanced
clinical competencies including evidence-based practice, clinical reasoning,
decision making, and the development of professional expertise. Her work
spans three major areas of occupational therapy education and practice,
from admissions to professional education (including curriculum design
and assessment) and clinical practice. In addition to her research in education,
she is involved in research on how to bridge the evidence-to-practice
gap where she uses an educational psychology perspective to examine the
use of theory in the design and delivery of effective knowledge translation
interventions. She is also interested in the concept of scholarship of practice
and the outcomes of clinical–researcher partnership on clinical practice.
Peg Wihtol, M.Ed., graduated from Cornell University, Class of 1968, and
received a M.Ed. from Framingham State College in 1973. Her careers included
teaching junior high science, being an entrepreneur, and managing
medical billing and offices. In retirement, she has been active as a part-time
employee, a full-time caregiver, and a community volunteer. She has lived
in Natick, Massachusetts, for almost 50 years.
Ewan Williams, Ph.D, is a research associate in the Department of Health
Sciences and Research at the Medical University of South Carolina. They
completed their Ph.D. in kinesiology and exercise science at the University
of Georgia’s Mary Frances Early College of Education, their master’s degree
in physiotherapy at the University of Birmingham, and their masters of science
in exercise physiology at the University of Exeter.
Hannah K. Wilson, Ph.D., RDN, LRD, joined Concordia College in fall
2021 as an assistant professor in the Department of Nutrition, Dietetics,
and Exercise Science. Dr. Wilson is also a licensed, registered dietitian
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
APPENDIX D 105
nutritionist
and serves as the coordinator of the Combined Dietetic Internship
and Master of Science in Nutrition Program. Dr. Wilson graduated
summa cum laude with a bachelor of science in nutrition and food science,
with an emphasis in dietetics and minor in chemistry, from Georgia
Southern University. She then completed her Ph.D. in foods and nutrition
and a dietetic internship in the Department of Nutritional Sciences at the
University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia. She holds a certificate in obesity
and weight management from the University of Georgia Graduate School.
Dr. Wilson’s research interests focus on the influence of lifestyle interventions
and improvements in diet quality on chronic disease prevention. She
teaches nutrition, life-cycle nutrition, community nutrition, management,
medical nutrition therapy, clinical experience, advanced medical nutrition
therapy, and applied dietetic practice.
Dr. Wilson is originally from Dublin, Georgia, and now lives in Fargo,
North Dakota.
Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population Through Health Professions Education: Proceedings of a ...
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.